She Picks the Wine. Then Spits It at You.

By JOSHUA BARONE 

Bridget Everett's cabaret show is known to have a splash zone. The 44-year-old queen of no-holds-barred music and comedy often bites the cork out of a bottle of chardonnay and spits it at the audience before indulging and then liberally spraying the crowd. (She is also known to end each performance by sitting on an audience member's face.) So it came as no surprise that, as I joined her on a recent shopping trip, the first thing she said was, ''I start right at California Chardonnays -- shall we go?''

We were at Astor Wine & Spirits, a few doors from Joe's Pub, Ms. Everett's de facto home base for New York shows and where she returns on Feb. 7 and 8 for her signature performance, a mix of brash storytelling and power ballads with her band, the Tender Moments. After decades of grinding it out in the downtown scene while working in restaurants, Ms. Everett is embarking on what promises to be her biggest year yet.

When we met, she was on a break between concerts and the Sundance Film Festival, where she was featured in two new movies: ''Patti Cake$,'' in which she plays the mother of an unlikely aspiring rapper, and ''Fun Mom Dinner,'' where she joins Molly Shannon, Toni Collette and Katie Aselton for wine-soaked high jinks. (Both have been picked up by distributors.)

''I waited tables for 25 years,'' Ms. Everett said while surveying the store's options, noticing that her favorite label, Rombauer, was the store's staff pick. ''They used to call me the Wine Whisperer.''

''I like my wine like I like me,'' she added. ''Big and bold.''

Ms. Everett has a voice powerful enough to fill an arena (which she has done). It pairs well with her outsize persona onstage, where she welcomes accidental nudity and forces audience members to lick whipped cream off her body, join in lewd singalongs, or ''motorboat'' her, by placing their face between her breasts. The titles of her songs -- and the names of her dresses -- are largely unprintable. Her Comedy Central special was ''Gynecological Wonder.''

Ms. Everett's outlandish, unapologetic aesthetic has made her a favorite of other boundary-pushing performers like Amy Schumer, who featured her in the film ''Trainwreck'' and aired a Joe's Pub performance to close the first season finale of ''Inside Amy Schumer.''

''It's just really satisfying,'' Ms. Schumer said of Ms. Everett's budding fame. ''She's my absolutely, bar none, favorite performer to see live. She's such a star. There's no other word.''

Ms. Everett is still getting used to praise like this, which pours from the mouths of celebrities including Patti LuPone and Sarah Jessica Parker. ''Every once in a while, I'm like, 'What world am I living in?''' she said, and admitted she is prone to being starstruck. At Sundance, she jokingly flirted with the actor Gael Garcí Bernal. ''I still can't breathe,'' Ms. Everett wrote in an email after the festival. ''He glows.''

Singing has always been a part of Ms. Everett's life. As the daughter of a music teacher in Manhattan, Kan., she was steered to voice lessons (and away from computer classes), she recalled in a post-shopping interview at the apartment of her longtime costume designer, Larry Krone.

The lessons paid off: She received a full choral scholarship to <pos>Arizona State University</pos>, then stayed in Arizona, where she was a karaoke maven and worked at the first P. F. Chang's. She waited on athletes including Charles Barkley and Mark McGwire and made connections that brought her opportunities like singing the national anthem at baseball games -- with no flourishes, she emphasized. ''I'm a big believer that if you're not Whitney Houston, you sing the notes on the page,'' she said.

In the mid-1990s, Ms. Everett said, she realized she didn't want to spend her life as a karaoke singer, and packed up for New York. She hasn't been back to Arizona since.

Work didn't come easily. Ms. Everett starred as the mother in a children's theater production of ''Hansel and Gretel,'' and casting calls fell flat. She worked at places like the Ellen's Stardust Diner, famous for its singing waitstaff, and in off-hours built a small following as a karaoke singer with dramatic, bold renditions of go-tos like ''You Oughta Know'' and ''Piece of My Heart.''

A turning point came when a friend introduced her to the world of downtown performance. He took her to see the cabaret duo Kiki and Herb, and Ms. Everett became close with Murray Hill, the borscht belt-style comedian and host. Through karaoke and this network of performers, she landed gigs at Ars Nova and LaMaMa -- and, of course, Joe's Pub.

Over the past decade, Ms. Everett has developed the onstage persona that is familiar and beloved among her fans. Her bawdy comedy, paired with original songs -- which, while hilarious and heartbreaking, run the gamut of emotions -- now make for a surprisingly cathartic experience.

''It's a kind of shock theater,'' Ms. LuPone said. ''You're exposing yourself, and it's a release. It's a revival. Those evangelical preachers have nothing on Bridget.''

Murray Hill compared Ms. Everett to ''Rocky.'' ''Her shows are a prizefight,'' he said. ''She's fighting against what she is supposed to be -- the norm, the box that women are put in. She comes out swinging. We root for her all night.''

Catharsis, Ms. Everett said, is at least what she was trying to experience for herself. ''I think in my personal life I wasn't finding much happiness,'' she said. When she performed at Joe's Pub only once a month in between restaurant shifts, she added, ''these shows were the only chance to feel these emotions.''

But her career progressed with a slow, steady burn. In 2013, she received a New York Voices grant from Joe's Pub, which led to her 2014 show ''Rock Bottom,'' written with Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman, of ''Hairspray'' fame. Both songwriters said they did little more than polish the songs Ms. Everett had written. ''She has great ear for hooks, and she's a beautiful lyricist,'' Mr. Shaiman said. Mr. Wittman added: ''There was a lot under the motorboating and bikinis that she was willing to share. We just tried to bring more of that out.''

Writing the show's stunning finale, ''I'll Take You Home,'' for example, started with a melody line and lyrics by Ms. Everett. The final result, which was fleshed out with Mr. Shaiman and Mr. Wittman, is a dynamic progression from a quiet, delicate beginning to a rousing, belted ending that often inspires standing ovations.

''Rock Bottom'' was the final push for quitting what Ms. Everett likes to call her ''slave job'' at the restaurant, which she kept for health insurance. When the manager emailed to ask when she was coming back, Ms. Everett sent a triumphant reply: ''I'm not coming back.'' Then she went to a performance of ''Rock Bottom.''

''I told everybody, and I was crying, and they were crying,'' she said. ''The audience has been with me through everything. It was pretty emotional.''

''Rock Bottom'' ended up selling out, and it occasionally returns to Joe's Pub for brief runs. One of its newest regulars is Poppy, the dog she adopted in 2015 and a social media celebrity in her own right.

''Since I got her,'' Ms. Everett said, ''it's like my songwriting has changed. My life has changed.'' She added that, since she has no training as an actor, she thought of Poppy while filming a sad scene in a movie recently. It worked; there were tears.

In fact, the bottle of Rombauer Ms. Everett bought at the wine store was for Poppy's sitter. After all, she doesn't buy only one bottle at a time. ''When I was waiting tables, it was whatever they had for $10 to $15 from Napa,'' Ms. Everett said while perusing labels. ''But now I'll order a case of Rombauer. I've worked hard. I deserve it.''

Top, Bridget Everett and her dog, Poppy, at Astor Wine & Spirits. Above, Ms. Everett in her show ''Rock Bottom'' in 2014. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY NINA WESTERVELT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; SARA KRULWICH/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170205ed2500050