A Vivid Journey to the Heart of Movement

By ALASTAIR MACAULAY

MONTCLAIR, N.J. -- Sometimes dance fills the eyes with tears, changes our breathing or makes us laugh -- but why? The dancers aren't depicting emotion, yet we find ourselves powerfully moved. On Thursday night at the Alexander Kasser Theater at <pos>Montclair State University</pos>, the dancers of the Richard Alston Dance Company, the London troupe that revisits the New York area about once every two years, caused a gamut of emotion, just by taking us to the heart of dance itself.

The Alston style is rich, pliant, full-bodied. Footwork, often fast, brings éan, wit, brio. Jumps greet chords like bells chiming. Torsos bend eloquently, sometimes effortlessly down to the floor, sometimes gently swaying like a breath. Sometimes a recurrent step makes us hear pattern in the music, as when a quick lift of the foot to the opposite knee matches a suspenseful phrase-ending in the score. Complex sculptural lines register like harmony; rapidly traveling hops make those lines sing.

Mr. Alston, who is British, studied for two years at the Merce Cunningham Dance Studio in the 1970s and has worked more recently with New York Theater Ballet and Miami City Ballet. (In March, the students of Juilliard Dance perform his ''Sheer Bravado,'' from 2006.) But his work is best seen with his own dancers. Most of the current group members have been with him several seasons now. They all register as mature people who know who they are; Vidya Patel, Liam Riddick and Ihsaan de Banya are among the most individually striking.

Alston style, usually barefoot, is hybrid, deriving both from Cunningham modern dance and ballet. These dancers, this style's meticulous exponents, show why Mr. Alston has been Europe's finest dancemaker since the death of Frederick Ashton in 1988. They demonstrate how he's as tellingly musical as any choreographer alive.

All the program's four works, made in 2015-16, are having their American premieres here. ''An Italian in Madrid'' is set to nine bewitching keyboard sonatas by Domenico Scarlatti. A fascinating program note (I read it after seeing the dance) confers a more specific historical meaning on Scarlatti and the dance; but the deeper spell comes from the steps. ''Mazur,'' a male duet, is set to a series of Chopin mazurkas; ''Stronghold,'' an ensemble choreographed by Martin Lawrance (Mr. Alston's rehearsal director) uses recorded music by Julia Wolfe; and finally Mr. Alston's ''Chacony,'' another historically minded creation, has two parts -- one to a composition by Henry Purcell (late 17th century), the other to a 1945 one by Benjamin Britten (mid-20th).

Jason Ridgway plays the Chopin items (as he did the Scarlatti) stunningly; the dancers, Mr. Riddick and Nicholas Bodych, suggest Chopin's longing for Poland and intense companionship in exile. Ms. Wolfe's ''Stronghold'' is for eight double basses, with amazingly dramatic sonorities. Mr. Lawrance's choreography catches the drama in the score, even finding, within the harmonies, pulses that the music seems to lack. Purcell's ''Chacony,'' in red baroquelike costumes, is accompanied by the Repast Baroque Ensemble in the orchestra pit; Britten's is played by the Shanghai Quartet behind the dancers, who now return to the stage in pale modern attire.

While all these dances richly abound in specific dramas and suggestions, the bigger emotions they prompt derive from the felicities with which moves meet music: poignant, puckish, exuberant, by turns. Each dance makes its own idiom. The courtesies and springing footwork of ''An Italian in Madrid''; the through-the-body manners of ''Mazur'' create Polishness by gestures, pouncing steps, melodic phrasing. In ''Chacony,'' legs and lines sing juicily; Mr. Alston's gift for duets and ensemble finds a marvelously textured, polyphonic richness.

Peak Performances

Through Sunday at Alexander Kasser Theater at <pos>Montclair State University</pos>, peakperfs.org.

Above center, Elly Braund and James Muller, with members of the Richard Alston troupe, in ''Chacony''; left, Vidya Patel and Liam Riddick in ''An Italian in Madrid,'' at the Alexander Kasser Theater at <pos>Montclair State University</pos>. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANDREA MOHIN/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Document NYTF000020170204ed2400050
