Political Jewels From Old Venice That Still Shine

By CORINNA da FONSECA-WOLLHEIM

For New Yorkers seeking temporary respite from political Twitter storms, Carnegie Hall is usually a safe space. And its special festival ''La Serenissima: Music and Arts from the Venetian Republic'' may seem particularly appealing. With a sumptuous red-and-gold Carnival mask adorning the marketing materials, and a program promising liberal amounts of Vivaldi, the festival, which runs through Feb. 21 at Carnegie (and elsewhere), virtually guarantees escape.

But culture was never apolitical in Venice, a fiercely independent city sitting at a crossroads of civilization. In fact, the impressively diverse and broad offerings include events with acute contemporary resonance. Consider this your trigger warning.

#MuslimBanProtest

Vivaldi's only surviving oratorio, ''Juditha triumphans'' -- which the Venice Baroque Orchestra performs on Tuesday -- contains glorious music and a blood-soaked libretto lifted from the Old Testament. It was also written to commemorate (read: gloat over) Venice's victory against the Ottoman Empire at the siege of Corfu in 1716. But unlike most of its Christian neighbors, the Venetian Republic maintained uninterrupted contacts with the Islamic Middle East and maintained trade links even in times of war.

[Video: Vivaldi Juditha Thriumphans [selection] Venice Baroque Andrea Marcon Watch on YouTube.]

On Feb. 17, the vocalist Ahmet Erdogdular and his intimate instrumental ensemble show how Venice, with its trading power, was the link between Turkey and Europe.

#Can'tBelieveIStillHavetoProtest

The first feminist treatise in Italian was published in Venice in 1600. Written under a pseudonym by a poet who would die in childbirth before seeing the work published, ''The Worth of Women'' takes the form of a literary dialogue, depicting seven Venetian noblewomen puzzling over men's animosity toward their sex and proposing equal access to education as the best tool to fight inequality. The English-language performance, on Feb. 11 at Casa Italiana Zerilli-Marimo at <pos>New York University</pos>, represents the American premiere of this work.

[Video: Amor non si fugge Watch on YouTube.]

And on Feb. 17, Barbara Strozzi is the focus of ''The Secret Lover: Women in 17th-Century Italy,'' a program by the ensemble Tenet. At a time when few women composed, she wrote elegantly sensual music for an academic society founded by her father -- but had to weather constant comments about her looks.

#FakeNews

Five hundred years before Twitter, the most feared troll in Italy was Pietro Aretino, a satirist, pornographer, playwright and blackmail artist adept at extorting money and favors from nobles and cardinals with the power of his pen. The Frick Collection, which holds one of Titian's splendid portraits of this ''scourge of princes,'' sheds light on the painter and the libertine in a curator talk on Feb. 15.

#BlackLivesMatter

Based on a 16th-century story about a Moorish general in the Venetian army, Shakespeare's enduringly unsettling ''Othello'' explores themes of prejudice, loyalty and betrayal. From Wednesday to Feb. 19, Juilliard Drama presents the tragedy in a pared-down version for seven actors, directed by Jonathan Rosenberg.

[Video: L'incoronazione di Poppea - Nerone & Seneca Watch on YouTube.]

#SenateHearings

''I care nothing for the senate and the people,'' the emperor Nero sings in Monteverdi's ''L'incoronazione di Poppea,'' just before raging at the philosopher Seneca, who advises him to be less divisive. (Nero will order Seneca's death in Act II.) As the concluding event of the festival, the Concerto Italiano, under the direction of Rinaldo Alessandrini, shares a concert performance on Feb. 21 of this beguiling opera, first presented in Venice during Carnival 1643, with its seductive score wedded to a memorably cynical, amoral plot.

La Serenissima

Through Feb. 21 at Carnegie Hall (and elsewhere); 212-247-7800, carnegiehall.org/venice.

Far left, a painting by Bernardo Strozzi believed to be of the composer Barbara Strozzi, who is the focus of ''The Secret Lover: Women in 17th-Century Italy.'' Left, one of Titian's portraits of Pietro Aretino, a rogue known as a satirist, pornographer, playwright and blackmail artist. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ARTE & IMMAGINI/CORBIS, VIA GETTY IMAGES)

Document NYTF000020170204ed2400063
