Creating a Safe Space for California Dreamers

By PATRICIA LEIGH BROWN

Correction Appended

The <pos>University of California, Merced</pos>, rises apparition-like out of a landscape of cow pastures, cotton fields and grasslands. In the cool of the morning, the faint scent of manure, the olfactory signature of the Central Valley, hangs in the air.

The campus is meant to evoke this rural setting. The crop-colored yellow and gold exterior of Tenaya Hall is set off by corrugated metal accents —ouches reminiscent of the silos and the fields in which so many of the students’arents work. Tenaya Hall is home to the Fiat Lux Scholars, a special initiative for first-generation, low-income students that is named for the <pos>University of California</pos>’ motto, “et There Be Light.”

The <pos>Merced</pos> campus opened in 2005; with just 7,000 students (it’ slated to expand by 2020 to 10,000) it does not yet possess the critical mass necessary to support a Gap, a Shake Shack, a Starbucks or other college-town amenities. And so it remains of the Valley — place of poverty, hit hard by the foreclosure crisis, in which an aspiration gap plays out in underperforming schools; only about 13 percent of Merced County residents have a bachelor’ degree.

The university’ mission has been to change that equation. About 70 percent of the student body are the first in their families to attend college, and roughly 5 percent are undocumented immigrants.

The Fiat Lux program, established in 2010, is designed to reach these students, the ones who grew up sleeping on living room floors so the bedrooms could be rented out, or who learned how to rub garlic on the bottoms of shoes to ward off snakes while crossing the desert. The idea is to provide a pedagogical and social armature to help them navigate college, especially the pivotal first year that research shows is the strongest predictor of college success.

And so as freshmen, 175 of the scholars, 22 of them undocumented, live together on the upper two floors of Tenaya Hall, sharing sparsely decorated rooms reflective of their modest means — graduation watch here, a pair of Huaraches there.

One of them is Aurora Fabian. On the wall of her bunk bed in Room 351C there is a thumb-tacked quote she takes to heart: “appy People Shine Brighter!”ike her peers who entered the country illegally, Ms. Fabian always tries to shine bright. Her path from Mexico to this campus was hard won. From fifth grade onward, she was out until almost midnight helping her single mother mop, sweep and clean the counters of a bakery before moving on to scrub the tile floors of a nearby Italian restaurant.

Through it all, she managed to play high school soccer, run cross-country, work summers and weekends on the Santa Cruz boardwalk. Determined to “hange our family history,”s she puts it, Ms. Fabian won two local scholarships and a coveted spot at the <pos>University of California</pos>.

Collectively, the freshmen in Tenaya Hall are the beacons of a better life. They are the sons and daughters of housekeepers, dishwashers, fast-food cooks, farm laborers, landscapers, garment workers who stitch labels onto clothing and contractors who build swimming pools for affluent homeowners along the coast.

Francisco Gavidia in Room 470C fled the violence in El Salvador, sleeping on his grandmother’ dirt floor until he could join his parents, whom he knew only through photos and phone calls. He remembers an incident growing up in East Los Angeles in which his mother, who worked below minimum wage, took him to the E.R. with a bloody nose and was handed a bill for $3,000. “ felt really bad,”e said, jiggling his leg as he recalled it. “t was just a bloody nose and it was really expensive.”

Cruzangel Nava in Room 450G, a political science major, grew up in a part of Coachella light years away from the eponymous music festival. The family lost their two-story home to foreclosure during the recession; Mr. Nava, then in seventh grade, watched in stunned silence as his parents sold off the family’ two cars, his toys, his bike, his game system and his clothes —is father’ hand-embroidered poncho hanging in his dorm room a cherished exception. “hey told me they were selling to people who didn’ have things,”e said.

Juan Robles in Room 451A saved up money for college by picking plums alongside his mother, who raised three children by rising at 4:30 a.m. six days a week to work in the fields. A champion debater, Mr. Robles is easy to spot in his jacket, tie and matching silk pocket handkerchief, a sartorial foreshadowing of his career goal to be a legislator crafting “mall policies that can make a big difference in someone’ life.”t’ a difference he knows first hand.

Theirs is the #undocupower generation.

Many of Tenaya’ undocumented come from so-called mixed-status families, with siblings born in the United States. Karen Gomez, a sophomore who serves as a peer counselor, tried to stifle the envy she felt being left behind during summers while a younger sister traveled to Mexico, including to their grandmother’ funeral. “he’ say little ungrateful things about going,”he said. “’ think, ‘on’ you realize how lucky you are?’ ”er sister, now a junior in high school, will be eligible for scholarships that her big sister cannot apply for. A model peer counselor, Ms. Gomez tapes safe sex pamphlets, free condoms and other necessities of college life on her door.

Living together as a cohort is meant to foster bonding, and to ease first-generation students into the larger community. It is also an approach strongly associated with student retention; Fiat Lux Scholars graduate at a higher rate than students with comparable grade-point averages. Those accepted into the program —here is a waiting list —ttend numerous workshops aimed at what is called procedural knowledge, boning up on study skills and learning how to connect with professors and research opportunities. Several times a semester there are organized lunches with faculty members.

Many come to college never having met a professor, notes Tanya Golash-Boza, a sociology professor. “ome come into my office literally shaking.”

Ms. Golash-Boza recently completed a study of 35 undocumented Merced students and found that 22 of their families earned less than $25,000 a year, on par with the average for undocumented students across the <pos>University of California</pos>’ 10 campuses. Financial pressure is considerable, she said, but because of Merced’ first-generation majority, students feel less isolated. “hese students understand not being able to afford lunch,”he said. “here’ no shame associated with being poor here.”

Charles Nies, the vice chancellor of student affairs, was a first-generation, low-income student himself. The guiding premise, he said, is to “reate an environment where these students matter.”

Many in Tenaya Hall grew up having to keep their status a secret, a heavy psychic burden. Madely Martinez, a biology major, remembers hiding from vigilantes after being dropped off in the desert by a blue truck, having to lie flat and still as fire ants crawled all over her. The scene would repeat itself in recurring childhood nightmares. “ was always afraid,”he said. “ thought that even my friends might call the cops.”

For Ms. Martinez, the opportunity to live among smart young people who grew up in similarly fraught circumstances felt like a chrysalis breaking open —he butterfly the apt symbol of the immigrant rights movement.

“ou don’ have to hide the person you are,”he explained, sitting amid miscellaneous stuffed turtles and under a poster for the Dance Coalition, the campus performing troupe she belongs to. “oming here, I realize I’ not the only person who has these fears.”

She is among thousands of students around the country who are attending college largely because of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, known as DACA. The directive, established in 2012 by executive action, provides work authorization and a temporary reprieve from deportation for so-called Dreamers (derived from failed legislation called Development, Relief and Education for Alien Minors), who entered the country illegally as children. While undocumented students are ineligible for federal financial aid, including loans, with DACA they can take jobs and graduate teaching assistantships to help defray the cost of their education.

The directive is distinct from most immigration policies in placing educational attainment front and center; applicants must be in school or have a high school diploma or equivalent. DACA recipients —here are more than 750,000 nationally —end to be an accomplished bunch: Nearly 15 percent are pursuing a master’ degree or higher, according to a 2016 national survey, and 28 percent are studying STEM, making it the most popular major. Because they can renew their DACA status every two years, many have leveraged their education into careers in their chosen fields.

•

On the morning of Nov. 9, the study lounge on Tenaya’ fourth floor filled with students in their pajamas calling their parents through tears. “ couldn’ hold my composure,”ecalled Cruzangel Nava. “ completely broke down.”any students, fearing the potential deportation of their parents, headed home to keep them close.

“here was a lot of anxiety,”aid Ms. Gomez, the peer counselor. “eople wanted to be with their families.”

Donald J. Trump campaigned on the vow that he would send the undocumented home and terminate DACA, calling the executive action that created it illegal and unconstitutional. On DACA, he has softened his tone. In the president’ first week in office, a spokesman said that Mr. Trump would work with Congress for “ long-term solution on that issue,”nd instead focus on deporting those with criminal records.

But Mr. Trump has taken forceful action against immigrants, closing the borders to refugees and ordering his wall with Mexico. His choice for attorney general, Jeff Sessions of Alabama, has been a consistent and vociferous critic of both illegal and legal immigration, and has tried several times to pass laws abolishing DACA. What the president has in mind for DACA is an open question.

Students feel particularly vulnerable because applying for DACA means handing over personal information to the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, part of the Department of Homeland Security. It is impossible to slough off anti-immigration sentiment and plans for walls when your very own family members are “he illegals.”

Alejandro Delgadillo, associate director of the Calvin E. Bright Success Center at <pos>Merced</pos>, which has a “afe space”or undocumented students, has been trying to calm nerves. The university had sent notices around in December urging DACA students studying abroad to come home well before Jan. 20 to avoid possible detention at the border. It likewise has advised those planning to study abroad to stay put. A “now your rights”egal workshop is set for early this month.

“e’e always told our students to take advantage of the opportunities they have here at the university,”aid Mr. Delgadillo, who has worked with unauthorized students for 25 years. “ can be reassuring,”e said. “ut for the first time in my professional career, I can’ tell them not to fear.”

Diana Peñ, the U.C. system’ full-time mental health provider for undocumented students, based at Berkeley, said her caseload has nearly doubled since the election. Students have had difficulty sleeping and taking tests or complain of “eadaches and stomach aches having to do with the way the body absorbs stress,”he said. These symptoms, she said, have been exacerbated by discriminatory comments on social media.

“he lives of these students are very fragile,”aid Marcelo M. Suáez-Orozco, dean of the graduate school of education at the <pos>University of California</pos> at Los Angeles and an author of a national study in 2015 of undocumented undergraduates. They have spent their formative years in a “abyrinth of liminality,”e said. “hey play Little League, they sell lemonade, they join the Boy and Girl Scouts. And then one day they learn: By the way, you’e not an American.”

The study found “reathtaking levels of anxiety,”ith clinical stress levels four times higher for young women and seven times higher for young men than the norm. Respondents also reported feeling isolated on campus, uncertain about whom they could trust.

DACA has given these goal-oriented young people the opportunity to plan and imagine a future for themselves, Dr. Suáez-Orozco said. They now find themselves in a “orrific Kafka-like situation”n which they have potentially outed their parents to federal authorities. “hat young people crave more than anything else is a sense of belonging,”e added. “ow they are going back to a deep crisis of uncertainty. This is a seismic shift.”

Francisco Mascorro Montes —iko to his friends —eeps rosaries from his Mexican grandmother beside his bed in Tenaya Hall, an emblem of his faith. A mechanical engineering major, he is a member of Ingenieros Unidos, a student chapter of the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers. He earned money for books and a laptop by operating a peach-sorting machine last summer.

“ny fear I have is for my parents,”e said. “ know the university has our backs.”

Indeed, in contrast to South Carolina and Alabama, which prohibit undocumented students from receiving in-state tuition, and Georgia, which prevents them from attending three top public universities, California has a formidable array of state laws and university policies designed to support them.

The state has the most DACA recipients in the country —bout a third of the total —nd they benefit from in-state tuition rates and access to financial aid under the California Dream Act ($1,670 for community colleges to a maximum of $12,294 for the University of California).

It was Janet Napolitano, president of the <pos>University of California</pos>, who developed DACA as secretary of Homeland Security under President Obama. Her appointment was at first controversial because of her enforcement of deportations. But early in her tenure as university president, she started a $5 million fund that pays for advisers like Mr. Delgadillo and resource centers on each campus, where undocumented students can receive academic, career and financial aid advice. Last year, her office allocated $8.4 million, much of it for a universitywide revolving “ream Loan”und.

Ms. Napolitano has taken a strong stance defending the civil rights of her system’ roughly 3,800 undocumented students, including stating publicly that the university would not comply with any national registry based on race, religion or national origin. She and heads of the state’ two other public university systems wrote a joint letter to Mr. Trump in support of DACA students.

California itself is poised to push back against the Trump administration. The Democratic-led legislature recently retained Eric H. Holder Jr., attorney general under President Obama, to represent them in any legal fights against the new Republican White House. Lawmakers have also pledged to enact legislation that would provide free legal help for immigrants facing deportation proceedings. Unauthorized children now receive Medi-Cal, state public health insurance for low-income residents, and Gov. Jerry Brown signed a bill, awaiting a federal waiver, to allow undocumented immigrants to access the benefits of the Affordable Care Act (should it survive).

Nevertheless, educators and immigration lawyers are operating on the assumption that DACA is in jeopardy, even as they keep a watchful eye on the Bridge Act, co-authored by Senators Richard J. Durbin and Lindsey Graham, a potential lifeline that would extend benefits for three years if DACA is revoked and toughen confidentiality protections.

Allison Davenport, a staff lawyer at the Immigrant Legal Resource Center, has been meeting with students at the Dream Success Center at <pos>California State University</pos>, Fresno. Like many of her colleagues, she is advising first-timers who have yet to apply for DACA to hold off. They risk turning over their personal data with potentially no return. She has been up and down Highway 99, the spine of the Central Valley, conferring on family preparedness plans, including “hat will happen if someone is detained?”nd “ho are your emergency contacts at school?”

Advocates and administrators throughout California say they have observed pronounced signs of unsettledness. At <pos>California State</pos>, some undocumented students have been asking if they should drop out, others are limiting their time in public spaces; in the Long Beach Community College District, which has a large Cambodian population, students appear to be changing addresses without leaving forwarding information; applications for state financial aid are down by one-third compared with the same period last year. “arents are afraid the information will not stay within the state,”aid Lupita Cortez Alcalá the executive director of the California Student Aid Commission.

If DACA goes, of course, the ability to work legally goes with it, along with any health insurance an employer might provide and, in some states, driver’ licenses and in-state tuition.

Raul Z. Moreno, coordinator of the Dream Outreach Center at <pos>California State, Fresno</pos>, said that graduates who either didn’ apply or did not qualify for DACA have been creatively cooking up career paths that do not require work authorization —he undocumented music teacher teaching at-risk students outside of school, the computer scientist who sets up shop repairing and selling cellular phones. “t depends on their special talent and academic preparation,”e said. “nfortunately, this doesn’ use their full potential. Ideally, the system allows them to be who they want to become.”

•

Along with hot plates and minifridges, resilience and tenacity are staples of Tenaya Hall. In rooms grouped by sixes down long corridors, young people who spent their winter vacations cutting other peoples’rass and cleaning other peoples’loors try hard to study and party, and pretend everything is normal.

Rosalba Zavaleta, Aurora Fabian’ roommate in 351C, is confident that whatever happens with DACA, she will be fine; her concern is for her sister Faviola, who grew up with juvenile arthritis, unable to walk. The disease, with which she still struggles, was the impetus for the family’ journey from Mexico. A state program for low-income children with severe medical conditions paid for her surgeries.

“ don’ mind washing dishes,”s. Zavaleta said of the prospect of being deported. “ut what’ going to happen to my sister?”

Cruzangel Nava, who is set on being a district attorney, would turn to farm labor and landscaping. “hey don’ care who does that work as long as the work gets done,”e said, adding that being sent back to a country he doesn’ know “s like an animal in a cage being put into the wild.”

Ms. Gomez, whose mother is a hotel housekeeper, grew up in the cramped confines of farmworker housing. Some days, the family didn’ have enough to eat. On her desk at Merced, she keeps a picture of her high school graduation. She wears a cap and gown with a gold sash (for highest honors), a black sash (for student body president), a blue sash (for secretary of the community service organization) and a gold medal (for achievement in Advanced Placement calculus). “t shows me that if I made my parents proud that day, then I can continue when I graduate,”he said. She goes back to that photograph every single day.

Patricia Leigh Brown, a former staff reporter for The Times, writes on culture and community from California.

Correction: February 4, 2017, Saturday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misstated a requirement for DACA recipients. They can be in school or have a G.E.D. certificate. They don’ have to be a high school graduate.

* Campuses Wary of Offering ‘anctuary’o Undocumented Students

Madely Martinez, Juan Robles and Cruzangel Nava, all undocumented, are housemates in Tenaya Hall, a dorm for low-income, first-generation students at the <pos>University of California, Merced</pos>. | Damien Maloney for The New York Times | A sculpture entitled “eginnings”n the Merced campus. | <pos>U.C. Merced</pos> | “ny fear I have is for my parents,”aid Francisco Mascorro Montes, a freshman from Mexico. “ know the university has our backs.” Damien Maloney for The New York Times | Aurora Fabian and Rosalba Zavaleta room together at Tenaya Hall. Thumb-tacked to their wall is the quote: “appy People Shine Brighter!” Damien Maloney for The New York Times | Francisco Gavidia fled El Salvador. | Damien Maloney for The New York Times

Document NYTFEED020170203ed23003bo
