An Ancient Practice That’ Music to Their Ears, and More

By JON HURDLE

PHILADELPHIA —n the tower of St. Mark’ Episcopal Church here, a circle of men and women were taking turns pulling ropes that moved up and down through holes in the ceiling some 20 feet above them.

The ropes were attached to eight bells hanging in a belfry, and the adults were working hard to create the glorious and constantly changing cascade of notes that rang out over Center City Philadelphia.

The participants are “hange ringers,”ractitioners of an ancient art that first summoned the faithful to church in 12th-century England. Today, the art is kept alive by small bands of devotees, many of them older adults, at various locations around the world, particularly in England.

The combination of mental discipline, physical stamina and rigorous teamwork helps to explain the appeal of change ringing to retirees, who typically have the time and experience to become successful ringers, and who are the majority in many ringing groups.

For those accustomed to the automated church bells ringing on the hour or at regular intervals, change ringing is a more complex undertaking.

The ringers at St. Mark’ and about 6,000 other churches of various denominations around the world create their joyful symphony with a small number of bells —ypically six or eight. The notes remain the same, but the bells are played in a perpetually changing sequence and emphasis, requiring close teamwork, a keen memory and years of practice.

“he mental agility and the social side is definitely a big part of it,”aid Bruce Butler, president of the North American Guild of Change Ringers, which was started in 1972.

Many ringers are older because “hey learned when they were younger, and have stuck with it,”r. Butler added.

Many value the friendships they have built over the years with their own groups, and with the ringers who welcome them in other cities or countries.

“ou can walk into a tower anywhere on a practice night and someone will immediately say, ‘re you ringing?’”aid Andrew Evans, 65, an Englishman who usually rings at Gloucester Cathedral in England but was recently in Philadelphia for the annual Quarter Peal Weekend held by the Philadelphia Guild of Change Ringers. “hey will say, ‘es, O.K., what do you want to ring?’hen you have a ring and go to the pub.”

Mr. Evans, a retired research director for a French multinational company, said he used to play golf before he lost the sight in his right eye, and with it, the ability to putt. So he was looking for another social activity that gave him some exercise. He decided to revive his experience of ringing, which began when he was 15 and growing up in an isolated English village where there was not much for a teenager to do besides ring bells in the local church.

Ringing a “ethod”—he name given to a set pattern of notes —equires the participants to memorize the order in which their bells will sound in relation to all the others, a sequence that will change with each rotation of notes.

While each of the methods practiced at St. Mark’ on a recent evening contained a few dozen changes and lasted five to 10 minutes, the longest sequence commonly performed —nown as a “eal”—ontains 5,040 changes. It takes about three hours to go through the sequences, which can test the mental and physical reserves of the ringers.

The Quarter Peal Weekend drew about two dozen ringers who gathered at the Church of St. Martin-in-the-Fields in Philadelphia’ Chestnut Hill neighborhood. Groups of eight rang a series of quarter peals, each of which contained about 1,260 changes and took 40 to 45 minutes to complete.

With its advanced methods, the weekend was mostly set up for experienced ringers who wanted to extend themselves in the company of other experts.

“hen the local band is not good enough to ring something more complicated, you can get expert ringers who come from other towers where they can’ ring this more complicated method and the combined group can ring it,”aid Donald Trumpler, 86, who began ringing in 1965 but no longer participates because of physical frailty. He and his wife, Elisabeth Trumpler, were among the founders of the North American Guild of Change Ringers.

“f you ring just in your own tower, you get a level of comfort with the bells but you don’ progress beyond that,”r. Trumpler said. “etting out of that comfort zone in order to ring heavier bells, lighter bells, bells that don’ go as smoothly as they do at home, that’ a learning experience.”

Mr. Trumpler, a former mathematics professor, said that any novices at the Quarter Peal Weekend would have to be guided by the experts. “o ring a complex method, you need at least N-1 expert ringers where N is the number of bells,”e said.

The mathematical nature of change ringing helps to explain why it sometimes attracts those with a scientific bent, said Paul Heinsdorf, a math student at <pos>Temple University</pos>.

“t’ interesting because it’ all about permutation groups,”r. Heinsdorf said. “ou’ be surprised how many people who do this are physicists or mathematicians.”

Mr. Heinsdorf began ringing when he was 11 or 12 and stopped when he was 14 but always “ame back to the tower.”e now rings at St. Martin’ once a week during the summer and is trying to build his skills. But he is under no illusions about the amount of work that will take.

At 34, Mr. Heinsdorf was one of the youngest ringers at the Quarter Peal Weekend. His participation was especially welcomed by older ringers who fear the art will eventually die out unless younger recruits can be found.

“ou can learn how to ring a bell in a day, but the speed, the precision, the permutations required, I’ not there yet,”e said. “his is not something that you can walk into a bell tower and do. This is a technical skill where you are observing everybody else, and you have to know where the pattern goes in the future.”

The presence of experienced ringers at the event was evident; only four of the 20 pieces attempted had to be halted because they became irretrievably out of sync, a higher success rate than usual, said Mr. Butler, the main organizer of the event.

“his year, we got more experienced participants than we usually have,”aid Mr. Butler, 67, a retired math teacher who learned his skills in England, where the vast majority of the world’ collections of bells —r “ings”—sed in change ringing can be found. In North America, there are 52 “ings,”ost of which are in churches, but with several in schools and universities, he said.

For Susan Clopper, a retired bookseller from Middletown, Del., the best thing about change ringing is the teamwork that can result in a finely honed performance when everyone is firing on all cylinders.

“verything comes together and it’ wonderful,”aid Ms. Clopper, 73, who has been ringing since 1976.

Memorizing the changes requires a lot of study beforehand, she said, and a lot of concentration during the performance. But once you have mastered the technique of pulling your rope, there is not too much physical strength involved, added Ms. Clopper, who weighs 100 pounds.

She usually rings the treble, or smallest bell, but has rung bells weighing up to one ton. “t’ mostly technique,”he said.

Ringing has taken her to several cities, including Honolulu, Vancouver and Little Rock, Ark. But the highlight, she said, was ringing a method called “ambridge Surprise”t Great St. Mary’ Church in Cambridge, England.

Whatever the motivation, many ringers find themselves drawn back to the tower once they have acquired a taste for it, Mr. Heinsdorf said. “o matter what you do, you are always going to come back ringing.”

From left: Russell Torrey, Bruce Butler and Alan Morrison at St. Mark’ Episcopal Church in Philadelphia, where they are practicing the ancient art of change ringing. Mr. Butler is the president of the North American Guild of Change Ringers. | Matt Stanley for The New York Times | Elisabeth Trumpler, a change ringer for more than 45 years, practicing at St. Mark’ Episcopal Church in Philadelphia. | Matt Stanley for The New York Times | Elisabeth Trumpler pulling a rope attached to an overhead bell during practice. Change ringing is kept alive by small bands of devotees, many of them older adults. | Matt Stanley for The New York Times | "Change ringers,”ractitioners of an ancient art that first summoned the faithful to church in 12th-century England, can spend hours practicing and ringing bells in the proper sequence. | By PHILADELPHIA GUILD OF CHANGE RINGERS

Document NYTFEED020170203ed23007y5
