Russell Koplin, Eric Friel

389 words

Russell Arden Koplin and Eric Michael Friel were married Feb. 4 at Marc Forgione, a restaurant in Manhattan. Susan S. Danoff, a retired judge of Family Court in Brooklyn, officiated.

The bride, 39, who is keeping her name, is a television, film and stage actress and does voice-overs. She appeared on Broadway as Éonine Théardier in “es Miséables”rom 2000 to 2002, and in the role of Lily in “ames Joyce’ the Dead”n 2000. Her film appearances include Clair in “he Brooklyn Banker,”hown at the Sundance Festival last year, and as Darlene in “ad Women”2015). She also works part time as the director of event volunteers at Achilles International, a nonprofit in Manhattan that promotes athletics for people with disabilities. She graduated from <pos>Northwestern</pos>.

She is the daughter of Nedra S. Koplin and Dr. Richard S. Koplin of Manhattan. The bride’ father, an ophthalmologist, works at Ophthalmic Consultants, a group practice in Manhattan, and is a co-director of the cataract department at New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai. Her parents are on the board of Foster Pride, a nonprofit in Manhattan that mentors foster children through art.

The groom, 47, is a senior managing director of Stone Lion Capital Partners, a distressed-debt hedge fund in Manhattan. He graduated from <pos>Virginia Tech</pos>, and received an M.B.A. in finance from <pos>Washington University</pos> in St. Louis.

He is a son of Linda M. Hession of Sachse, Tex., and Dennis M. Friel of Alexandria, Va. The groom’ mother retired as an executive assistant in the marketing department of American Express in Dallas. His father retired as the Midwest regional director of field operations for the National Education Association in Washington, the labor union representing public-school teachers and other support personnel, faculty and staff members at colleges and universities.

The groom’ previous marriage ended in divorce.

The couple met at a pre-Valentine’ Day party last year, on Feb. 4, at Dylan’ Candy Bar in Union Square in Manhattan —he is a friend of Dylan Lauren (the candy shop’ namesake), and he is a friend of Ms. Lauren’ husband, Paul Arrouet. Last October, Mr. Friel proposed while they were apple-picking at an orchard in the Berkshires.

Document NYTFEED020170204ed24001xh
