Octavia Spencer Condemns Trump Followers Who Reject ‘idden Figures’

By CARA BUCKLEY

The past year has been a momentous one for the Oscar-winning actress Octavia Spencer, one of the stars of “Hidden Figures,”ased on the true story of three black female mathematicians working at the nation’ space agency in the Jim Crow South.

Ms. Spencer’ performance earned her an Oscar nomination for supporting actress (she won in 2012 in that category for “The Help”. And the film, a best picture Oscar nominee and box office hit, landed an upset victory for best ensemble at the Screen Actors Guild Awards on Sunday. To top it off, Ms. Spencer, 46, was named Woman of the Year by <pos>Harvard University</pos>’ Hasty Pudding Theatricals.

She chatted with the Bagger a few days after the SAG Awards about her deep pride in the film, frustration with people who doubt the tale it tells is true, and her plans for keeping sane amid tumultuous times. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.

Congrats on the SAG win. Was it a surprise?

It was a surprise. It was also deeply felt. The women that we portrayed —orothy Vaughan, Katherine Johnson and Mary Jackson —re being recognized by our society 50 years later. The win means we did our jobs and conveyed these women as they truly and deeply were.

You’e been talking about this film for nearly a year now. How do you keep it fresh?

It will always be fresh. All I am is an actor. These are people contributed to space. There are a few idiots out there who think it didn’ happen.

Really? Who?

It’ the Trumpites who think people are bending the truth. It’ mind-boggling to me that we have totally regressed to this whole labeling and colorism and just ridiculous racist bigotry that is percolating in society right now.

Do you think this movies is encouraging little girls or women to go into STEM jobs?

Oh, absolutely it’ helping. I want little girls —black, white, Asian, Latina —to know that they have something to contribute. I was so inspired by the little girls dressing up as the women we represent.

Your “hidden Figures”o-star Taraji P. Henson said in the SAG acceptance speech that this film is about women who didn’ complain despite all the hurdles they faced in their time. They put their head down and worked. Do you feel like that is the path toward progress?

I think there’ a healthy medium. I think you have to keep eye on what’ going on. But the most important thing is people need to call their reps, and also give money to the American Civil Liberties Union, if they can afford it. Because those are the people that will be fighting on our behalf, and we want them to go in with deep pockets, and to be able to wage war. But I also want people to go the movies, and have escapism. Every now and then I have to turn the news off, and guard my space, my home, with solace, with positive energy. We have four years to put up with this.

You won the Hasty Pudding. Had you visited <pos>Harvard</pos> before?

I visited it in my dreams. I knew my family couldn’t afford it. Maybe I would’ve gotten in —my grades were good, though not 4.0. I was a smart student but also a suck-up in a lot of ways. To be singled out by <pos>Harvard</pos> for my work was just humbling. It was just the most fun day ever.

Both films that you’e received Oscar nominations for feature an ensemble of women. I wonder if you feel at ease because you have a ton of siblings?

I’ one of seven, I’ next to the youngest, and there was one boy. Oh, I know about sisterhood, honey. Because I live in an ensemble sisterhood.

Does it feel different, this second Oscar nomination?

The first one, there’ nothing to prepare you for it. The second time is even sweeter.

Now it’ for this role, this woman who was not ever in her lifetime going to get this recognition. The fact that I’ getting the recognition on her behalf is even sweeter.

Did you watch the nominations?

I watched them after. You hear people saying, “h, I wasn’ up.”elieve me, you get up. I was terrified. I decided: “o, I’ going to wait. If the phone doesn’ ring, I’ going to enjoy my morning.” didn’ sleep. Then you know it’ going to happen at 5:30. It’ the longest 15 or 20 minutes. I thought, “.K., it didn’ happen.”hen the phone rang and it’ like, “hank you, God.”

Octavia Spencer of “idden Figures,”ttending the Screen Actors Guild Awards. | Frazer Harrison/Getty Images

Document NYTFEED020170203ed230040h
