A Father’ Wrenching Memoir of Death, Guilt and Denial

By MELANIE THERNSTROM

DISASTER FALLS

A Family Story

By Stéhane Gerson

258 pp. Crown. $26.

Stéhane Gerson’ slim volume of anguished reflections circles around a terrible story. One summer, the Gerson family joins a group on a guided white-water rafting trip on a part of the Green River that runs near the border between Utah and Colorado —aving never tried the sport. On the afternoon of the first day, they arrive at a section of the river whose ominous name was given by a 19th-century explorer to warn travelers: Disaster Falls. In spite of his inexperience, Gerson decides to take his 8-year-old son, Owen, over the falls in a light inflatable rubber kayak known, in rafting parlance, as a ducky. The guides have described it as less stable and more responsive to the churning waters, which Gerson thinks will be more exciting for Owen than the raft carrying his wife, Alison, and their older son. In an instant of inattention, Gerson allows the ducky to go too close to the rocks and it flips. The current sucks them under; Gerson breaks free, but Owen is caught in the rocks and drowns.

By the time Owen’ body is found, it is too late in the day to get out of the wilderness. In that long sleepless night in the tent Alison declares, “e cannot revisit the past.”o a remarkable extent the couple seem to stick to the “act”hey “ealed in the tent.”hen, months later, Alison confesses one morning, “ometimes I go back to the river,”he does so in a whisper and immediately apologies. The pact, Gerson explains, permits them to express general sadness with each other, but not to “onder out loud whether we would make it, or say things like my life is finished”r to “rag the other, unprepared, back to the accident.”

While the pact may be adaptive for them as a family, it proves an impossible commandment for a memoir. The book seems muffled by a protective code of silence that keeps Gerson from fully examining the agonizing issue of responsibility at the heart of the book and writing about what it means to have caused the death of a child he loved so much. Gerson is a historian — professor of French studies at <pos>New York University</pos> and the author of several academic books. He is adept at conveying himself as a character struggling with grief, plunging the reader into the intimate eddies of emotion and his own, Alison’ and their surviving son’ attempts to create a new order as a family of three. He is a compelling and sympathetic character. But the book would benefit from more of Gerson’ historian self: the writer who analyzes the material and tells us how he ultimately comes to regard his conflicted emotions. He writes movingly about his feelings of guilt and failure —is piercing belated insight that, above all else, “he benchmark for a good father”s ensuring his children survive to adulthood. But he also repeatedly quotes others assuring him that he is “n no way responsible,”nd it remains frustratingly unclear how he ultimately judges himself.

In one sense, the accident is clearly his fault —he result of a risk he took —s well as the fault of the guides who assured him it would be O.K. But in a deeper sense the suffering, of course, is undeserved and, as he says, the death is cruelly “nfair.”he nature of tragedy is that one ordinary human lapse of judgment can lead to untold suffering. The Gersons sue the guiding company on the grounds that although they signed the releases, they did not understand the risks. The rafting company’ director testifies that the company does not “ry to hold out to passengers that this is a safe trip.”ndeed, Gerson himself had had a deep sense of foreboding looking at Disaster Falls that day —he sense that “ churned-up demon of destruction and terror”urked beneath the waters. Yet he allowed himself to trust the guides’ssurances over his own instincts.

There is a certain kind of parent who is drawn to high-risk sports, and one might assume Gerson was a daredevil. Poignantly, the truth seems to have been the opposite: That day at the falls can be understood as a counterphobic attempt by the professor to overcome his own cautious temperament as well as his son’. Gerson writes that he came close to saying no to the rubber ducky that day at Disaster Falls, when both he and Owen were frightened, but he felt that “aying no would tell Owen to choose a safe and protected existence over an exposed and passionate one.”

The book is written in a fragmentary form with snippets of reflection or dialogue, moving toward and away from the day of the accident. Gerson is a gifted writer, and most of the prose is piercing, precise and graceful. Yet there are moments the writing seems odd, awkward or stilted, veering into grand, vaguely poetic metaphors that don’ hold up, perhaps as if they might be translated from Gerson’ native French. (For example, “erhaps Owen uttered these words because his throat had opened so wide that it took in the crisp air and let out the dread and exhilaration that stand as the impossible horizon of a life that already seemed short and long at the same time.” The most powerful writing is the most direct, such as when Gerson is sucked under the current and thinks he may die: “he possibility of dying filled me with disbelief: Death in these circumstances? Why are we even here? And if I am about to die, then what is happening to Owen?”

The one part of the book I found difficult to reread was written the most straightforwardly — litany of regrets Alison writes to her son after he dies: “ am sorry you are gone. I’ sorry we couldn’ save you, find you, protect you.    I am sorry you will never marry, have sex, kiss a girl.    I am sorry your front teeth didn’ come in before you died.    I’ sorry my life is what it is —ithout you.”

Alison is increasingly convinced that she can communicate with Owen —hat when she goes for a walk in the woods near their house, he is sending her signals in heart-shaped rocks she collects or rabbits that cross her path (she used to call him Bunny). Gerson’ “nternal battles with magical thinking”ake him “esent Alison’ certainty when it came to Owen’ presence,”nd he fears she is moving closer to Owen and farther from him, disappearing into a psychic realm where he cannot follow. But ultimately, he aligns himself with his wife and adopts her conviction that Owen’ death was in some way cosmically prefigured. Gerson points to several incidents before the accident: a day when he went into Owen’ room and found himself imagining that Owen was dead and a night that Alison woke with a “errifying presentiment.” few months after the accident a silver frame around a picture of Owen went inexplicably dark for half a second.

People related that Owen had confided to them “hat even though he looked like other children, he could see things they could not,”uch as red flashes and odd shapes on the carpet and walls, and that he was accompanied by “ benevolent force”hat he could see from the corner of his eye. Perhaps Owen’ struggles with insomnia were because “e was confronting these flashes and shapes along with the prospect of final solitude,”erson decides and “ad some acquaintance with death.”

Alison seeks out a medium who tells her that she has communicated with Owen and that he wants his parents to know the accident was not their fault. He knows the medium may be telling them what they want to hear, but finds “omfort in the story, forceful and necessary”nd decides that “hether events on the river had taken place that way or not hardly mattered at that moment”ecause “lison and I could choose to make this story our own; we could compose it together.”

What are we to make of this —n idea that seems to erase the tragedy in all of its wrongness and frame it, somehow, as part of Owen’ nature and therefore, in some sense, meant to be? Certainly, bereaved parents should embrace any story that gets them through the day. But it’ not clear how Gerson regards this story —s a convenient fiction or as his own assessment? Although there is much to admire in it, “isaster Falls”s the rare book that would have been better longer, with these issues thoroughly explored. The book reads more like journal entries or notes toward a book rather than a finished project. But it is also a testament to its power that we long to know more and wish that Gerson had put it in a drawer until he was ready to fully examine the unbearable.

Melanie Thernstrom is the author, most recently, of “he Pain Chronicles.”

Anna Parini

Document NYTFEED020170203ed2300566
