Art

796 words

Our guide to new art shows -- and some that will be closing soon.

'JONATHAS DE ANDRADE: O PEIXE' at the New Museum (through April 9). This young artist from Recife, Brazil, asks tough questions about the country's colonial past and its supposedly race-blind present. His absorbing new film -- the hit of last year's Sã Paulo Biennial, now on view in this museum's ground-floor gallery -- takes place along a river in Brazil's poorer, blacker northeast, where bare-chested fishermen perform a strange ritual with their catches: They cradle the animals to their chests, stroking their gills and kissing their craws as the life goes out of them. The ravishing film recalls the controversial history of European ethnographic cinema, but ''O Peixe'' is a slipperier fish than most: The ritual is an invention of Mr. de Andrade's. The artist's trickery around matters of race and anthropology is impressive, though you can ask whether Mr. de Andrade's steamy shots of these poor black workers' biceps and thighs actually achieves his critical goals, or just gives a majority-white art audience muscular bodies to gawk at. (Jason Farago)

212-219-1222, newmuseum.org

'MARISA MERZ: THE SKY IS A GREAT SPACE' at the Met Breuer (through May 7). This survey of tenacious, innovative, often beautiful work belatedly reveals its maker, now 90, as the queen of Arte Povera, the postwar Italian movement known for using humble materials. It runs from her early cut-aluminum ''Living Sculpture'' pieces to drawings, paintings and small sculptures of mostly female heads. Constant experimentation with materials, a disdain for traditional finish and some revenge on the male gaze emerge. (Roberta Smith)

212-731-1675, metmuseum.org

'I'M NOBODY! WHO ARE YOU? THE LIFE AND POETRY OF EMILY DICKINSON' at the Morgan Library & Museum (through May 28). This is the second-largest gathering ever, anywhere, of prime Dickinson relics, and as such it comes with an aura the size of a city block. It instantly turns the Morgan into a pilgrimage site, a literary Lourdes, a place to come in contact with one aspect of America that truly can claim greatness. And the show has a mission, to give 21st-century audiences a fresh take on Dickinson. Gone is the white-gowned Puritan nun, and the Belle of Amherst, that infantilized charmer. At the Morgan we get a different Dickinson, a person among people: a member of a household, a village dweller, a citizen. (Holland Cotter)

212-685-0008, themorgan.org

'PERPETUAL REVOLUTION: THE IMAGE AND SOCIAL CHANGE' at the International Center of Photography (through May 7). The International Center of Photography opened in 1974 as a showcase for socially concerned picture making, and has stayed on mission, even as photographic technology has expanded to encompass the internet. This exhibition reflects those shifts. It's as committedly topical as anything the center has done, with six thematic sections focused on climate change, immigration, gender issues, racial turmoil, terrorism and the 2016 presidential election. At the same time, is looks different from shows past as digital media -- smartphone videos, Twitter outtakes, Instagram feeds -- outnumber photographic prints. (Cotter)

212-857-0000, icp.org

'INVENTING DOWNTOWN: ARTIST-RUN GALLERIES IN NEW YORK CITY, 1952-1965' at Grey Art Gallery, <pos>New York University</pos> (through April 1). Abstract Expressionism has had a lot of attention, but the New York art world of the 1950s was a complicated place of many barely tangent circles. It's badly in need of study, and now it's getting some in this labor-of-love exhibition. With nearly 230 objects, it has its share of stars. But it's far from a masterpiece display. It's something almost better: a view of typical -- rather than outstanding -- art, of familiar artists looking unfamiliar, and of strangers you're glad to meet. It looks the way history looks before the big museums get their sanitizing hands on it: funky, diverse, down to earth, with things to teach us about now. (Cotter)

212 998-6780, greyartgallery.nyu.edu

Last Chance

'CICI WU, HO KING MAN, WANG XU: MOSQUITOES, DUSTS AND THIEVES' at 47 Canal (closes on Feb. 12). These three artists are prime examples of transnational identity, having been born in China and educated in America, where they now live as artists and run an alternative space in New York called Practice. Here, at their first collaborative exhibition, they create the sense of an intimate conversation among a small, international group of friends. With sculpture, video, installation and a book of poetry, they defy expectations of what global art should look like, choosing to make intimate statements, rather than take on broad sociopolitical issues. (Barbara Pollack)

646-415-7712, 47canal.us

Document NYTF000020170203ed230005w
