California Today: The Decline of Organized Farm Labor

By MIKE McPHATE

Good morning.

(Want to get California Today by email?  Here’ the sign-up  .)

Let’ turn it over to Thomas Fuller, our San Francisco bureau chief, for today’ introduction.

More than four decades ago California passed a landmark law protecting the state’ farmworkers from abuse and helping them to organize.

But the recent resignation of the head of a board that oversees the implementation of the law highlights the extent to which organized labor among farmworkers has collapsed since the days of the pioneering labor leader Cesar Chavez.

Chavez’ activism was instrumental in the creation of the Agricultural Labor Relations Act in 1975, the passage of which Gov. Jerry Brown described as a major accomplishment of his first stint as governor.

In his recent resignation letter, the head of the board, William B. Gould IV, described the law as “rrelevant to farmworkers.”e estimated that less than one percent of the agricultural work force is now represented by a union.

As chairman of the Agricultural Labor Relations Board, Mr. Gould was charged with overseeing the certification process of union elections. Yet Mr. Gould said virtually no workers came to the board during his tenure.

“uring the entire three years that I was chairman of the board there was only one petition for representation filed by a union in the state of California,”e said.

Mr. Gould says a major factor for the decline of organized farm labor is the fear that undocumented workers have of dealing with the government. Around half of the Californian agricultural work force is in the country illegally.

“here is not only no incentive to complain but there is no incentive to become involved with government in any way,”r. Gould said.

California’ agricultural industry is bigger than ever. It produces roughly a third of all fruits and vegetables grown in the United States and has about a third of the nation’ farmworkers.

Philip Martin, a specialist on organized farm labor, paints a less stark picture than Mr. Gould of the plight of farmworkers.

Farmworker wages “ave gone up significantly,”r. Martin said, and some workers have the benefit of voluntary agreements that growers sometimes enter with their suppliers. The average hourly wage of farmworkers in California is around $12, he said, above the state’ current minimum wage of $10.

Mr. Martin, a professor emeritus at the <pos>University of California, Davis</pos>, says estimates on unionization rates among farmworkers in California are not very reliable because there are no government requirements to report them. But he says it is undeniable that unionization rates have plummeted from the heyday of union power in the late 1970s.

“here’ not near the union activity that there used to be,”e said.

Unrest at <pos>U.C. Berkeley</pos>

Student groups at <pos>U.C. Berkeley</pos> had vowed to disrupt the scheduled appearance of a controversial, right-wing speaker.

And on Wednesday, as the speaker, Milo Yiannopoulos, an editor at Breitbart News, was set to appear, protesters delivered on the promise, setting fires and throwing objects at buildings.

The police canceled the event before it could begin, and buildings on the campus were locked down for several hours.

Mr. Yiannopoulos condemned the outcome. “ne thing we do know for sure,”e said on Facebook, “he Left is absolutely terrified of free speech and will do literally anything to shut it down.”

On Thursday morning President Trump responded on Twitter, appearing to defend Mr. Yiannopoulos and threaten the university’ funding:

If <pos>U.C. Berkeley</pos> does not allow free speech and practices violence on innocent people with a different point of view - NO FEDERAL FUNDS? —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 2, 2017

California Online

(Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.)

•hat a diverse California says about the future of political strife in the rest of the United States. [The New York Times]

• federal judge in Los Angeles blocked part of President Trump’ travel ban. [The New York Times]

•he Sierra Nevada snowpack is the biggest in 22 years —nd more snow is on the way. [The Mercury News]

•“ have found no other country that aligns more with my view of the future than New Zealand,”rote Peter Thiel. [The New York Times]

•napchat’ idea: Your online identity is not a compilation of everything you’e ever done, but “ho I am right now.”The New York Times]

•he big wave contest Titans of Mavericks was thrown into doubt after organizers filed for bankruptcy. [San Francisco Chronicle]

•akland’ mayor said the city would not subsidize a Raiders stadium. [East Bay Tribune]

•an Francisco’ Millennium Tower is still sinking, and residents may get stuck with the repair bill. [Bloomberg]

•“bout a third of all California renters today are paying more than 50 percent of their income in rent.”KQED]

•hat $1.9 million buys in Santa Barbara, Denver and suburban Philadelphia. [The New York Times]

• hummingbird egg has stalled a project to upgrade a Bay Area bridge. [The Associated Press]

•ovie review: “ater & Power: A California Heist”akes the case that water is becoming the new oil. [The Salt Lake Tribune]

And Finally ...

The country’ largest Ikea is opening Wednesday in Burbank.

To help grasp the enormity of the home furnishing emporium, some numbers:

8 —pproximate number of football fields that could fit in the store

19 —uildings razed to make room for it

600 —eats in the restaurant

30 —heckout lanes

1,700 —arking spaces

Countless —hoppers sure to get lost in the store’ labyrinthine layout

A photographer for The Burbank Leader took a tour. Take a look.

Want to submit a photo for possible publication? You can do it here.

California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com.

The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian —orn outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Davis. Follow him on Twitter.

California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and attended <pos>U.C. Berkeley</pos>.

Farmworkers packed lettuce in the Salinas Valley. | Jim Wilson/The New York Times | A Mechanics Bank was vandalized after protests turned violent in Berkeley on Wednesday. | Josh Edelson/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Less than half of California’ population is non-Hispanic white, foretelling the demographic change to come across much of the rest of the United States. | Monica Almeida/The New York Times | A surfer prepared to enter the water at the Mavericks surf spot last week. | Marcio Jose Sanchez/Associated Press | A three-bedroom contemporary home is on the market in Santa Barbara for $1,899,000. Set on a dead-end road in a hilly neighborhood a few miles north of the beach, it overlooks the 200-acre Parma Park. | David Mendoza III

Document NYTFEED020170202ed22003ux
