The Parachute Generation

By BROOK LARMER

When I first met Yang Jinkai, two days before he boarded a plane for America, the smog hanging over his industrial home city, Shenyang, had turned the sun into a ghostly orb. The 16-year-old paced around the family apartment as his mother labeled his suitcases and packed them with the comforts of home: quilted pajamas, chopsticks, instant noodles. She gestured toward a lone memento that would remain in his bedroom, a life-size needlepoint portrait of her only child, woven in shimmering gold thread. “ worked on that all year,”he said. “ knew this moment would come.”

Yang had never traveled outside China. But he had already chosen a new first name for his life in America, Korbin (“hat sounds American, right?”, and was daydreaming about the adventure ahead. “t will be magical,”e said. “’l make lots of American friends. I’ like to have an American girlfriend. Maybe”—e shot a glance at his father —“’l even get a gun.”ver the summer, Korbin had been working on his English by watching, perhaps too zealously, the American television series “riminal Minds.”

To help Korbin escape the competitive straitjacket of the Chinese education system, his father had paid nearly $40,000 to an education consultancy to get him enrolled in a public high school in Michigan. The Yang family’ ultimate goal was for Korbin to attend a top American university, and the name of his new high school, Oxford, only added to the allure. It didn’ matter that the place had no connection to the British university or that this Oxford was a small town north of Detroit. “y father,”orbin said, “eally likes the idea of an Oxford diploma.”

Even as U.S.-China relations have slipped toward mutual antagonism, the flood of Chinese students coming to the United States has continued to rise. Roughly 370,000 students from the mainland are enrolled in American high schools and universities, six times more than a decade ago. Their financial impact —11.4 billion was contributed to the American economy in 2015, according to the Department of Commerce —as turned education into one of America’ top “xports”o China.

It is a strange historical moment when the elites of a rising power send their only sons and daughters, products of China’ former one-child policy, to the schools of a geopolitical rival. Yet the idea of a liberal Western education exerts an almost talismanic hold over China’ ruling classes. While the country’ educational emphasis on rote memorization churns out some of the world’ best test-takers, many Chinese families harbor worries that diverge sharply from those of the tiger parents of popular conception. They fret about the toll competition exacts from their coddled offspring; they wonder if their child’ creativity is being stifled. Even President Xi Jinping, who is presiding over a crackdown on Western influences in China’ schools, allowed his daughter to attend <pos>Harvard</pos>. According to a 2016 survey conducted by a Shanghai-based research firm, 83 percent of China’ millionaires are planning to send their children to school abroad. The average age, according to the poll, has dropped to 16 today from 18 in 2014 —he first time it has reached the high-school level.

In 2005, only 641 Chinese students were enrolled in American high schools. By 2014, that student population approached 40,000 — 60-fold increase in a single decade —nd it now accounts for nearly half of all international high-school students in the United States. “arents realize that they have to start earlier if they want their children to get into a top U.S. university,”ays Nini Suet, founder of Shang Learning, a boutique consultancy with headquarters in Beijing that charges $25,000 to $40,000 to help Chinese kids prepare for and apply to American boarding schools. “amilies are looking for any edge they can get.”

As a new administration vowing “merica First”ettles into the White House, there is uncertainty about how long this phenomenon can last. It already faces headwinds within China. A slowing economy has cut into family savings, and a depreciating currency makes American educations more expensive. There are also fewer Chinese students to go around: The population of 18-to-23-year-olds has dropped by nearly a quarter in the last decade.

But the exodus of Chinese students continues for now, driven not just by a push from China but also by a pull from the United States. For each rich Chinese kid who enters an American school —hether public or private, college or high school —he multiplier effect means that entire communities can be buoyed by the buying power of the world’ second-largest economy.

That’ the hope, at least. The reality is more complicated. Much of the money spent by Chinese families desperate for American diplomas ends up with the intermediary companies that connect them with cash-hungry schools. These matches have yielded unusual results. According to an article in Foreign Policy magazine, nearly 60 percent of the high-school students end up in religious schools, despite coming from the world’ largest atheist state. (Their parents welcome the messages of safety, discipline and moral values that emanate from these faith-based institutions.) Another cohort winds up in what are effectively diploma mills, which confer visas and credentials but little adult supervision.

Public high schools are the newest frontier: Less than 5 percent of all Chinese “arachute kids”as they’e come to be called) are currently in public schools, but certain U.S. school districts have begun to rely on them to offset budget cuts and increase cultural diversity at the same time as private academies are reaching saturation points.

Few public school districts have deeper ties to China than Oxford, Mich., outside Detroit. In 2010, the town sought to create the first pipeline of Chinese students into a public high school, one that embodied its high school’ motto —“here the globe is our classroom”—ven as it brought tuition money to the school. As the number of foreign students grew, other Midwestern schools sought to emulate Oxford’ success. But when a Beijing education company proposed building a multimillion-dollar dormitory for Chinese students on the Oxford campus, a community battle ensued.

Chance put Korbin’ family at the starting point of Oxford’ experiment, in Shenyang. His parents grew up without proper educations in rural villages haunted by the memories of famine. His father, Yang Huaiguo, migrated to Shenyang and scavenged for scrap metal before finding success in the boiler-repair business and real estate. But he worried about Korbin’ education and the almost unrelenting pressure to study for the two exams that determine a Chinese student’ future: the high-school entrance exam, the zhongkao, and the university-entrance exam, the gaokao. There seemed to be no way out, until Korbin’ school opened an international wing in partnership with Oxford. The pitch was enticing: After spending 10th grade in the program, Korbin was guaranteed a place at Oxford High School for two years, until graduation.

His father insisted that this wasn’ just about family prestige or future job prospects. “ also want my son to understand, in a way that I never could,”e said, “hat the world is bigger than Shenyang, bigger than China.”

On his first days in Oxford, Korbin marveled at the blue skies, so different from northeastern China, and the absence of skyscrapers. All of America, in his TV-fueled imagination, was supposed to look like New York. Beyond its main street and century-old storefronts, Oxford (population 3,500) is a patchwork of gravel pits and horse stables, wooded subdivisions and a strip mall containing a single Chinese restaurant. Korbin’ host family lived in a house on a leafy cul-de-sac, with two basketball hoops in the driveway and a trampoline out back. Suddenly Korbin had four blond American siblings and a host mother he called “om.”is host father worked as an engineer in an automobile industry that blamed the loss of thousands of jobs in the last recession on a single culprit: China.

Korbin immersed himself in Americana: football games, big-box stores, even a Christian megachurch with its own rock band. He was hardly alone in his American adventure. Michigan has become a particularly popular destination for Chinese public-high-school students in the United States, and more than a dozen kids from Shenyang lived nearby. Even at Oxford, where Korbin and 23 other students ended up because their academic program in China and its agent, the BCC International Education Group, had partnered with the school, there were another 19 Chinese kids brought in by a Beijing-based company, Weiming Education Group. The two crowds didn’ mix much, in part because most of the Weiming students lived in a dormitory at Rochester College, a liberal-arts Christian school half an hour away. Korbin felt lucky with his American home stay.

His life in America was very different from that of his predecessors. When the first Chinese students arrived in the United States in the wake of the Cultural Revolution —nd later, after the 1989 Tiananmen massacre —any were so poor that they collected aluminum cans or worked janitorial jobs to survive. Today’ Chinese students tend to be far wealthier than their American counterparts, particularly in public high schools. Even among the middle-class students at Oxford, the Chinese kids stirred up envy, and some resentment, by flaunting multiple versions of just-released iPhones. (Korbin had only one.) The Chinese boys carried hundreds of dollars in cash and often wore a different pair of designer sneakers —Nike, Puma, Adidas —ach day. Korbin’ Chinese housemate, Oscar Kou, who liked to talk about his father’ fleet of luxury cars, spent several thousand dollars on a laptop so powerful that it blew out the fuses in their host family’ house.

Making American friends wasn’ as simple as Korbin had imagined. In the hallways at Oxford High School, whose student body numbers 1,845, the Chinese kids clustered together, chattering in Mandarin. Korbin longed to interact with his American classmates, but every time he tried, the conversations fizzled when he couldn’ understand their cultural references or slang. Still, Korbin made no secret of his mission. “’ a Chinese boy,”e told his classes, “ut I really, really want to make American friends. It’ the most important thing to me.”

Perhaps his best chance came at the homecoming dance that fall. As he walked across the floor under the spinning lights of a disco ball, Korbin worked up his nerve and asked an American girl to dance. She just laughed. Another girl, another rejection. Finally, the third entreaty succeeded —ust as a slow song started up and the dancers turned into a tangle of embracing couples. Korbin’ feet stopped, and his arms locked at his sides. “ totally froze,”e says. The girl drifted off to rejoin her friends, leaving Korbin alone, wondering if a Chinese boy could ever find his footing in America.

If your initial encounter with William Skilling took place in the Beijing Capital International Airport, as mine did, it would be easy to take him for a missionary. Dressed in crisply ironed khakis and a white button-down shirt, his short hair meticulously combed, he was headed to a dusty city in the Chinese interior. As superintendent of Oxford Community Schools, Skilling did see himself as a sort of evangelist for global education. On this trip to China, his 19th, he was reviewing plans for Weiming to build its multimillion-dollar dorm on land bordering Oxford High School. “t will be the first of its kind at any American public school,”e said.

For Skilling, a former high-school government and economics teacher, the dorm project was the culmination of years of networking with Chinese officials, educators and businessmen. His first foray into the China market came in 2008, when with the Chinese government’ help he started what would become one of the largest Mandarin-language programs in American schools. Today more than 2,300 students in Oxford schools, K through 12, take daily classes in Chinese. “he greatest challenge we face in American education,”killing said, “s preparing students to work and live in a global world that is changing 24-7.”he Mandarin classes were also part of a local government plan to lure Chinese investment to southeastern Michigan. “here was a reason that we, as a state, weren’ making inroads into China,”killing told me. “he Chinese knew Michigan was negative, blaming China for its woes. The way to turn this around was to pay China the highest compliment: by building a world-class Mandarin-language program.”

Beijing returned the favor. In 2013, Hanban —he state agency that runs China’ network of controversial Confucius Institutes, which promote Chinese culture, language and propaganda worldwide —ecognized Oxford Community Schools as the “onfucius Classroom of the Year.”killing parlayed such recognition into sister-school agreements with 20 Chinese schools. Over the past seven years, at least 40 different Oxford teachers and administrators have visited China. One major deal was struck with Korbin’ public school in Shenyang, which opened an international school for Chinese students, like Korbin, aiming to go to an American high school with a famous name.

With that deal, Skilling had lined up his first supply of Chinese students for Oxford. He also devised a way around the United States regulations that restricted international students to just one year in public high schools. By inviting a local college to sponsor the F-1 student visas for Chinese students in their second year, Skilling maintained that they could remain at the high school —nd keep paying tuition —o long as they were also enrolled in and paying tuition for full-time college-level courses. The second year was important: Chinese families want their children to have enough time to prepare for the American college process. The Department of Homeland Security raised no immediate objections, Skilling told me. “his had never been done before, so there were no regulations or road maps to follow,”e said. “his was literally a blank slate.”

Soon, Oxford was attracting Chinese companies with even bigger ambitions. In a trip to Michigan in late 2012, Weiming’ president, Lin Hao, laid out a vision in which 10,000 Chinese students would enroll in high schools in the United States, starting with experimental districts in the American heartland. Weiming, which bills itself as one of China’ largest private education companies, has followed a similar strategy at home, building 15 campuses with more than 30,000 students in nine provincial cities. As Lin told a visiting superintendent from rural southern Ohio: “n China, we have an old saying: ‘evolution begins in the countryside.’ ”

Within a year, Oxford signed a memorandum of understanding with Weiming that ensured an even greater supply of Chinese students —p to 200 of them annually for the next 20 years. For each student, Weiming would pay Oxford Community Schools $10,000 a year. It was a boon for a district facing budgetary pressures, but it was significantly less than the $40,000 that Chinese families paid Weiming for the full package of tuition, room and board, insurance and English-support classes. (The company says its fees have since gone down to about $30,500, as it competes for China’ middle-class market.)

Weiming also offered American public schools a bigger prize. If the number of Chinese students reached a certain threshold —rom 80 to 100 students —he company promised to build a multimillion-dollar student center and dormitory, at no cost to the school. As the Weiming contingent at Oxford grew, architects in Beijing and Michigan began drawing up blueprints for the dorm. Shortly after I met Skilling at the airport in the spring of 2014, he returned to Beijing to pore over blueprints of the proposed dorm with Lin. They met in Lin’ office, which was designed to replicate the room where Chairman Mao met President Nixon in 1972 to re-establish relations between their two countries. The wall behind Lin’ desk is covered with antique maps, one for each Chinese province where Weiming has built a school. It wouldn’ be long, perhaps, before a map of Michigan adorned the wall. “in Hao and I understand each other,”killing told me, “ecause we’e both visionaries.”

The loudspeakers in Oxford High School started blaring halfway through Korbin’ music-appreciation class. “his is a lockdown!” voice announced. “n armed intruder has entered the building!”orbin’ classmates leapt from their seats and, crouching low, rushed toward the door.

Korbin didn’ understand the commotion. His English had improved, but his vocabulary was limited —nd the loudspeakers were always a challenge. He had gotten used to the rock music that played between classes, creating the kind of happy chaos that would never be allowed in a regimented Chinese school. But this time the tone was grave: “eachers, secure your classrooms!”orbin’ confusion only deepened when the music instructor hustled everyone into the girls’athroom next door. “urry up!”he yelled. When Korbin made it to the bathroom stalls, the teacher locked the door behind him —nd they waited, in hushed excitement, until the drill was over.

Later, Korbin laughed about the experience. He had nearly forgotten that his mother’ fears about American life —he guns, riots, school shootings —ad almost scuttled his chances of studying in the United States. His father had made a reconnaissance visit to the country before he started, largely to reassure his wife that it was safe enough for their son. The only dangers Korbin faced in Oxford came from his innocent campaign for American friends.

One day, a group of jocks and slackers invited Korbin into the boys’athroom for a few puffs from an electronic cigarette. The initiation was unusual for a strait-laced Chinese kid, but he was thrilled to be part of an American posse. “ool kids never study,”e was told, so Korbin, until then a conscientious A student, eased off his schoolwork. He started lifting weights, thinking he might attract a girlfriend “fter I build some muscle.”

But when his new friends began pressing Korbin to join in hazing other kids, he pulled away. He wanted nothing to do with shouting racial epithets at the school’ few African-American students or taunting other Chinese kids with curse words in Mandarin. “ tried so hard to make American friends, but I lost all of my own Chinese style and character,”orbin told me last year. “ am not that eager to be part of American culture anymore. I would like to be myself, Chinese.”

With this part of his American dream tarnished, Korbin buried himself in his studies —nd emerged as a patriot. In September 2015, after Beijing held a missile-studded military parade to celebrate Japan’ defeat in World War II, he posted a picture on social media of the Chinese flag with the words “reat China!”t school, he nearly came to blows with a student who was badmouthing the Chinese “ictatorship.”he object of his anger was not an American but a fellow Chinese student.

Korbin and Oscar left their host family and moved in with four other Chinese students under the care of a local grandmother. Korbin stopped lifting weights. He no longer wanted an American girlfriend. He barely interacted with American students anyway, because everyone in his college-level classes —he requirement to maintain his visa during his second year —as Chinese.

Still, Korbin remembers his senior year fondly. After he regained his academic focus, his grade-point average rose to near the top of his class — 3.96 —nd his standardized-test scores climbed just in time for his college applications. It felt good to be a nerd again. “ realized that I’ an only son, the last of my family,”e told me. “y parents pay a lot for me to come here, so why shouldn’ I study hard?”

“Are you here for the meeting about the Chinese invasion?”

I had just pulled into the Oxford school parking lot when a bearded man in a baseball cap, an auto engineer, appeared at my car window and grumbled about the subject of that night’ public forum: Weiming’ plan to build its Oxford High School dorm. “s it really our job to be educating Chinese kids?”e asked.

Until October 2014, Oxford’ move into China’ orbit —he Mandarin-language program, the influx of Chinese students —ad met little resistance. But the proposed dorm for Chinese students hit a nerve. A board meeting erupted in chaos. The local newspaper, The Oxford Leader, ran an editorial titled “aking a Deal With the Devil.”nd now, as the engineer and 60 other residents gathered in the school atrium, Skilling found himself on the defensive. “’ here to defuse the situation,”e said.

After touting the benefits of cultural exchange, Skilling outlined the finances. When the school reached its goal of 200 tuition-paying Chinese students, he said, an estimated $1.3 million in annual net revenue would flow into school coffers. The bigger incentive, he argued, was the multimillion-dollar dorm, which would include eight classrooms for use by all students. “e don’ pay a penny,”killing said. “t’ a win-win.”

Near the end of a contentious question-and-answer session, Skilling talked about how this project would bring money from China back into Michigan. “ou’e heard Donald Trump say that China is trying to take advantage of us,”e said. “ agree. We’e willing to sell our souls to get a foot in China, and it’ a mistake.” woman behind me whispered to her companion: “ut isn’ that just what he’ done?”

Behind the scenes, a group of Oxford citizens began looking into the international program. “ don’ think the community objects to having foreign students here,”ays Kallie Roesner-Meyers, a horse-stable owner who started the group, known as Team 20. “ut there was so much secrecy and misinformation around the whole China setup that we needed to find out more.”n the spring of 2015, Team 20, which sent the district a flurry of Freedom of Information Act requests, discovered, among other things, that the school board had agreed to a 20-year deal based on Skilling’ recommendation.

In response to communication from Roesner-Meyers, federal agents questioned Skilling about his consulting work for Weiming. (Skilling says he ceased consulting before the Oxford deal went through.) One of them also wanted to know more about the visa maneuver by which Chinese students were staying for two years instead of one. According to Skilling, the agents said they “idn’ see any issue,”nd he told a reporter that Roesner-Meyers “eeds to settle down.”ut the pressure only persisted. Skilling retired later that year, and Weiming, without giving any explanation, put the dorm project on hold.

Weiming still has roughly 100 of its students at Oxford. And with thousands more students in its Chinese schools expecting to come to the United States, the search for a flagship location continues. In 2015, the company bid $12.6 million for a 58-acre property in West Hartford, Conn. It proposed to turn the former University of Connecticut site into an international school for 500 students, some of whom would feed into the city’ public high schools. Local officials supported the plan, but last May the City Council, responding to vocal opposition to a little-known Chinese company taking control of land in the city center, voted against it.

Hovering in the background of the West Hartford debate was the suspension of the Weiming dorm in Oxford —nd the government’ unresolved investigation into its international program. By November, the Department of Homeland Security offered a verdict. The visa maneuver would not be permitted in the future, a blow to the model Oxford pioneered.

Oxford has not been punished, but it will no longer be allowed to keep Chinese students for more than one year on its campus. The current crop of 41 second-year Chinese students has been allowed to stay, though they must now take all of their classes at Rochester College, the institution that sponsors their visas, instead of Oxford High School. In June, after a semester of isolation, these kids will even earn their high-school diplomas. The future of the first-year students is up in the air. They may not be able to graduate from Oxford next year, and it is too late to re-enter China’ gaokao system. So they and their families may be back on the international-student carousel, scrambling to find another school to attend next year.

The alphabetical seating at Oxford High School’ graduation ceremony last June put Korbin Yang in one of the last rows, surrounded by a clutch of Chinese classmates whose surnames begin with the letters X, Y or Z. They formed a sort of school-within-a-school, watching the parade of American graduates they barely knew. Many local students received raucous ovations as they crossed the stage. Korbin’ name —“raduating summa cum laude, Jinkai Yang”—licited only a muffled clap or two. In the fall, Korbin headed to <pos>Pennsylvania State University</pos>. His parents were proud that he had gotten into a Top 50 university where almost 2,500 Chinese students were already enrolled.

When I visited Korbin last summer in Shenyang, he took me to an American-style craft-beer pub his father partly owns. Over a game of pool, he spoke positively about his experience at Oxford. Still, he admitted, he left Michigan after two years without a single American friend. That surprised him. “eirdly, I think the experience made me appreciate Chinese culture even more,”e said. It’ a common sentiment among Chinese students abroad, who find that their foreign experiences sharpen their sense of national pride. Over the summer, Korbin started delving into Chinese history books and training in kung fu. In America, he found his Chinese core.

Now halfway through his first year at Penn State, Korbin can spend entire days without speaking a word of English. “’ around my Chinese friends all the time,”e says. “ can’ get a chance to know American friends.”he current political climate may only isolate him further. Korbin is in America legally, studying hard and leaning toward a major in electrical engineering. But how welcoming is a country that increasingly regards his homeland as an economic and security threat? If Trump is serious about being tough on trade, Chinese students, while not in the foreground of such a fight, could be an easy lever for either side to pull. The collateral damage of restricting visas would be devastating, not only for the students themselves but also for high schools and universities, especially across the Midwest, that have become dependent on the billions of dollars the Chinese contribute economically every year.

An even bigger threat may lie within China. Late last year, President Xi’ ideological campaign against foreign influences targeted the kind of schools that prepared Korbin for America. How this crackdown will affect the flow of Chinese students overseas is unclear. Parents may be compelled to send their children abroad at even younger ages to escape the closing cage.

For Korbin, the lack of American buddies and reawakened sense of national identity notwithstanding, high school in America still left a deep impression on him. Last Christmas, after exams, he went back not to Shenyang, but to Oxford. His second host mother gave him two hoodies and some of his favorite chocolate, and cooked a Christmas meal. Korbin presented her with a mug and played with the dogs he had helped care for as puppies. “ definitely wish I was still there,”e told me, and he sounded like just another first-year college kid, missing home.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Brook Larmer, based in Shanghai, is a contributing writer for the magazine. He last wrote about China’ secretive cram schools.

* Shanghai’ Move to Curb International Programs in Schools Worries Parents

* Inside a Chinese Test-Prep Factory

Korbin Yang (left) and his roommate, Oscar Kou, at their host family’ house in Oxford, Mich., in 2015. | Mark Peterson/Redux, for The New York Times | Students at the Oxford High School graduation. | Mark Peterson/Redux, for The New York Times | Korbin Yang (left) and his roommate, Oscar Kou, at their host family’ house in Oxford, Mich. | Mark Peterson/Redux, for The New York Times | Korbin at Oxford High School. | Mark Peterson/Redux, for The New York Times | Korbin at Oxford High School. | Mark Peterson/Redux, for The New York Times | Korbin (right) at Oxford High School. | Mark Peterson/Redux, for The New York Times | Korbin in his dorm at Pennsylvania State University in January. | Mark Peterson/Redux, for The New York Times

Document NYTFEED020170202ed220030l
