Berkeley Cancels Milo Yiannopoulos Speech, and Donald Trump Tweets Outrage

By CHRISTOPHER MELE

A speech by the divisive right-wing writer Milo Yiannopoulos at the <pos>University of California, Berkeley</pos>, was canceled on Wednesday night after demonstrators set fires and threw objects at buildings to protest his appearance.

The university announced the cancellation on Twitter around 6 p.m. local time, about an hour after a section of the campus erupted in protest.

All buildings on campus were locked down for several hours, and the university police said on Twitter that students should leave the area because of the “iolent demonstration.”he lockdown was lifted around 10:55 p.m. local time.

Early Thursday morning, President Trump spoke out against the university for canceling the event.

If <pos>U.C. Berkeley</pos> does not allow free speech and practices violence on innocent people with a different point of view - NO FEDERAL FUNDS? —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 2, 2017

In an appearance on “ox and Friends”n Thursday, Kellyanne Conway, one of Mr. Trump’ top advisers, compared the protest to those that took place at airports across the country over the weekend in opposition to the president’ executive order on immigration.

“ don’ even know if they know what they’e protesting,”he said. “s it the free speech? Having someone maybe on your campus who has a dissenting point of view or wants to present an alternative point of view?”

Gavin Newsom, the lieutenant governor of California and a former mayor of San Francisco, tweeted that he was “ppalled”t Mr. Trump’ apparent threat to take away the university’ federal funding.

As a UC Regent I'm appalled at your willingness to deprive over 38,000 students access to an education because of the actions of a few. pic.twitter.com/zzUaaaUM3u —Gavin Newsom (@GavinNewsom) February 2, 2017

Mr. Yiannopoulos, an editor at Breitbart News, is known for his gleeful attacks on political correctness that can sometimes veer into offensive and racially charged language. His flamethrower approach has aroused a fierce backlash.

He was barred from Twitter last year for inciting trolls to attack the “hostbusters”ctress Leslie Jones.

Ms. Jones was among those who spoke out last month when Mr. Yiannopoulos announced he had signed a book deal with Simon & Schuster that was said to be worth $250,000. The publisher defended its decision to publish Mr. Yiannopoulos in a letter to authors and attempted to reassure them that the book would not include hate speech. At least one author, Roxane Gay, pulled her next book from the publisher in response to its decision to work with Mr. Yiannopoulos.

His scheduled speech at <pos>U.C. Davis</pos> last month devolved into a tense standoff between protesters and the police. It was called off before it could begin over security concerns.

Mr. Yiannopoulos was invited by the Berkeley College Republicans, a student group that portrayed the event, on Feb. 1, as a way to jolt the liberal campus with a different perspective.

More than 100 faculty members called for blocking the event in a letter to Chancellor Nicholas Dirks. It cited a speech Mr. Yiannopoulos delivered at the <pos>University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee</pos> where he belittled a transgender student by name.

On Twitter, the <pos>Berkeley</pos> campus police described the episode on Wednesday night as “ajor protest attacks”nd urged people to stay away. Crowds lingered despite police orders to disperse.

In a statement, campus administrators condemned the violence and said it “ill now overshadow the efforts to engage in legitimate and lawful protest against the performer’ presence and perspectives.”

The university had gone to “extraordinary lengths”o plan for the event, it said, putting dozens of additional officers on duty and speaking to other campuses where Mr. Yiannopoulos had appeared. After Berkeley, he had no future appearances scheduled, according to his website.

On Facebook, Mr. Yiannopoulos said he had been evacuated from the campus after “iolent left-wing protesters tore down barricades, lit fires, threw rocks and Roman candles at the windows and breached the ground floor of the building.”

He added, “ne thing we do know for sure: The Left is absolutely terrified of free speech and will do literally anything to shut it down.”

A portable high-intensity light, the kind used on construction sites, was set afire, according to an image on Twitter.

Demo protesting Milo Yiannopoulos at @UCBerkeley has gotten a bit out of hand pic.twitter.com/drFjqiFkAL —esusCamposHernandez (@superzusgw) February 2, 2017

Mike McPhate contributed reporting.

* Milo Yiannopoulos Doesn’ Have Feelings

Police officers carried away a protester during a demonstration on the <pos>U.C. Berkeley</pos> campus on Wednesday. | Elijah Nouvelage/Getty Images | A protest in Berkeley, Calif., on Wednesday, aimed at Milo Yiannopoulos. | Elijah Nouvelage/Getty Images | A bonfire on Sproul Plaza at <pos>U.C. Berkeley</pos>, on Wednesday during a rally against a speaking appearance Milo Yiannopoulos. | Ben Margot/Associated Press

Document NYTFEED020170202ed22001rx
