
One Young Man’ Life Served Up Four Ways

By TOM PERROTTA 

By Paul Auster

When Kate Atkinson’ “ife After Life”as published in 2013, it felt like something new, a wildly inventive historical novel in which the main character dies repeatedly, only to get resurrected under different circumstances. The story keeps looping back on itself like a video game, giving the protagonist another chance to get things right, or at least explore alternate avenues of possibility. It’ an exhilarating experiment, liberating both writer and reader from the unforgiving linear logic of realistic narrative while posing intriguing questions about fate, identity and the power of individuals to control their own lives.

Paul Auster ventures into similar territory in “   ,”n epic bildungsroman that presents the reader with four versions of the formative years of Archie Ferguson, a Jewish boy born in Newark in 1947 (the origin of his unlikely surname is explained in the novel’ opening paragraph). Unlike Atkinson, who jumps around in time with mischievous pleasure, Auster sticks to chronological order, proceeding methodically from Ferguson’ childhood to his early 20s, focusing on fairly conventional coming-of-age subjects: family, friends, school, sports, sex and politics. What makes “   ”riginal and dauntingly complex is that Auster sets all four of his stories on parallel tracks and tells them more or less simultaneously, giving us four versions of Chapter 1 (1.1, 1.2, 1.3 and 1.4), followed by four versions of Chapter 2 (2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4) and so on.

The virtues of this unwieldy strategy take a while to announce themselves. In “ife After Life,”tkinson launches her novel with an actual bang —n assassination attempt on Hitler, no less —nd follows it in quick succession with a stillbirth, a drowning and a fatal fall from a building, immediately establishing a fast-paced atmosphere of danger and unpredictability. Auster opts for a more leisurely and earthbound form of storytelling, taking a hundred pages to sketch the outlines of Ferguson’ alternate boyhoods. In all four versions, he’ the only child of Rose Adler —ometimes she’ a photographer, sometimes a stay-at-home wife and mother —nd Stanley Ferguson, an industrious, uncommunicative man who owns either a single appliance store called 3 Brothers Home World or a chain of appliance stores called Ferguson’. In each retelling, the family lives in a different (but almost identical) New Jersey suburb —ontclair, West Orange, Millburn or Maplewood. The four versions of Ferguson’ early life are so similar that the reader has to struggle to keep one separate from the next.

In each of the variations, however, a fateful event at Stanley’ business (a burglary, a fire, a tragic death or a buyout) leads to altered circumstances. As a result, the Fergusons of Chapter 2 are more easily distinguishable. In one version, the family has taken a step down the economic ladder; in another, it’ solidly middle class; in yet another, it’ rich. In the most striking variation, Rose and Archie move to Manhattan, immersing themselves in a more sophisticated urban world of art galleries, classical music, foreign films and private schools.

A different sort of novelist might have used this setup as the jumping-off point for an exploration of social class, but Auster’ concerns lie elsewhere. Ferguson himself is mostly indifferent to money —e’ a child of the ’0s, after all, scornful of bourgeois materialism in all its forms —nd his identity remains consistent whether he’ attending a public high school in New Jersey or a fancy prep school in Manhattan. He’ a good athlete (sometimes he prefers baseball, sometimes basketball), a serious student with a social conscience, a passionate cinephile, a budding writer (sometimes journalism, sometimes fiction, sometimes film criticism) and a precocious young lover. One of Auster’ central points, it seems, is that the essential core of our character gets fixed early in life and remains relatively impervious to the fluctuations of circumstance.

What changes with each scenario are the people Ferguson comes in contact with and the influence they exert on his life. Some of these individuals exist in only a single narrative pathway, while others pop up repeatedly, playing different roles in different contexts. The most important of these recurring characters is Amy Schneiderman, whom the teenage Ferguson first encounters at a barbecue in Chapter 2.1. Her effect on him is instantaneous:

“nd then he heard her voice for the first time, Hello, Archie, and at that moment he knew, knew beyond any doubt that they were destined to be friends, which was a ridiculous assumption to make, of course, since how could he have known anything at that point, but there it was, a feeling, an intuition, a certainty that something important was happening and that he and Amy Schneiderman were about to set off on a long journey together.”

The multiple love stories of Ferguson and Amy —ometimes consummated, sometimes thwarted —orm the heart of the novel and bring the strengths of Auster’ peculiar narrative structure into sharp focus. Amy’ status as Ferguson’ soul mate and ideal sexual partner —“he indispensable other who dwelled inside his skin”—s so persuasively established that it’ profoundly disorienting to come across alternate scenarios in which she’ Ferguson’ cousin (his widowed mother has married her uncle) or, most inconveniently, his stepsister (his divorced mother has married her widowed father). There’ something funny and unexpectedly poignant about seeing these two characters —hose unbridled sexual passion we’e witnessed in a previous chapter —iving as stepsiblings in adjacent bedrooms, wondering “ow not to infringe on each other’ privacy.”heir romantic and psychological connection is so strong that the reader can’ help rooting for them to overcome whatever obstacles happen to be standing in their way in any given situation.

Unfortunately for Ferguson —nd for the reader —t’ not meant to be. In every scenario, Amy drifts out of his orbit during their college years, leaving him to face the onset of adulthood without “is most important comrade”t his side. Ferguson soldiers on in her absence, falling into bed with numerous women and a couple of men (in one story line, he happens to be bisexual), but none of these partners can compare with the girl who got away.

“   ”s a very long novel —t’ actually four books in one, or at least three and a third —nd like many gargantuan tomes, it loses steam and focus in the final stretch. In addition to the parade of forgettable post-Amy lovers, there’ too much textbook-style rehashing of the political turmoil of the ’0s (including an exhaustive account of the student unrest at <pos>Columbia University</pos> in 1968), and more about the minuscule particulars of young Ferguson’ literary and journalistic careers than most readers will care to know. But despite these flaws, it’ impossible not to be impressed —nd even a little awed —y what Auster has accomplished. “   ”s a work of outsize ambition and remarkable craft, a monumental assemblage of competing and complementary fictions, a novel that contains multitudes.

Tom Perrotta is the author of “he Leftovers.”is new novel, “rs. Fletcher,”ill be published in August.

Justin Renteria 