
Mayoral Candidate Has Raised $1.6 Million, but Connecting With Voters Is Tougher

By WILLIAM NEUMAN 


Paul J. Massey Jr., a wealthy real estate sales executive and a Republican who wants to unseat Mayor Bill de Blasio in November, is still an unknown quantity to voters. He has yet to mount a significant ad campaign, and he has said little about his platform.

He has, however, revealed an ability to raise money -- and spend it even faster.

His campaign took in $1.6 million, slightly more than half from donors outside the city, and about $600,000 more than the mayor, according to a report filed this month with the city's Campaign Finance Board. The report covers the last six months of 2016 and the start of January.

But he spent all of that and more, racking up bills of more than $1.9 million, much of it going to pollsters, political consultants and his top campaign employees.

In part to cover the gap, Mr. Massey lent his campaign $1.2 million, and he says he is willing to put up millions more of his own money. (Mr. de Blasio, in part because of earlier fund-raising and Mr. Massey's spending spree, has more than twice as much money in the bank as Mr. Massey. The mayor is also participating in the city's generous matching funds program and already has contributions that will qualify him for more than $2 million in public financing. Mr. Massey has opted out of that program.)

As the latest businessman to shoot for City Hall, following in the footsteps of Michael R. Bloomberg and others, Mr. Massey plans to sell himself to New Yorkers as an experienced manager who can do a better job of running the city than Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat.

''As people get to know me they're going to realize I'm the manager for the job,'' Mr. Massey said in an interview in his campaign office on the 12th floor of a building on Fifth Avenue near Madison Square (monthly rent: about $13,000).

But Mr. Massey, who favors tightly knotted neckties and crisp white shirts, was vague about how he would get his message across, falling into business-speak.

''It's a multipronged strategy,'' he said more than once, adding that he would reach out to New Yorkers through social media, more traditional media and community visits.

At the moment, Mr. Massey is mostly connected to his campaign team. Douglas E. Schoen, his chief strategist, is a veteran consultant and pollster best known for his work with Democrats like Bill and Hillary Clinton; he was also Mr. Bloomberg's pollster.

Mr. Schoen said an internal poll showing that most New Yorkers did not recognize Mr. Massey's name was not a handicap.

''That is an interesting data point, but not of fundamental importance in determining what will happen nine, 10 months from now,'' Mr. Schoen said.

The campaign paid Mr. Schoen $210,000 between September and January, according to its finance report.

Most of the consultants Mr. Massey has hired have deep New York Republican bloodlines, many with ties to former Gov. George E. Pataki. They include the Republican pollster Arthur J. Finkelstein; Chris Larson, a Republican operative close to Mr. Pataki; Cathy Blaney, a fund-raiser who has worked for Mr. Pataki, Mr. Bloomberg and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo; Adam Stoll, a former campaign manager for Mr. Pataki; and Ann W. Herberger, a longtime fund-raiser for members of the Bush family.

In addition, William F. B. O'Reilly, an adviser to many Republican campaigns, is acting as Mr. Massey's spokesman; other advisers include Mike DuHaime, who advised the presidential campaigns of former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, and Michael Lawler, a former executive director of the state Republican Party who was campaign manager for Rob Astorino during his failed bid for governor.

In some ways, Mr. Massey's candidacy is reminiscent of Mr. Bloomberg's candidacy for mayor in 2001. Like Mr. Massey, Mr. Bloomberg was a successful businessman with no previous experience running for office, who sold himself as a competent manager.

Mr. Bloomberg, however, is a billionaire who completely financed his campaigns with his own money. He spent more than $70 million on his initial run in 2001, $84 million in 2005 and $108 million when he ran for a third term in 2009.

Mr. Massey is a mere millionaire, and he says he will pay for his campaign with a mix of his own money and contributions.

Mr. Bloomberg, who at the time was not well known outside business and society circles, introduced himself to New Yorkers with a one-minute campaign ad in June 2001.

''People needed to understand his life story first, then learn what he stood for and how he was going to make their lives better,'' Edward Skyler, the press secretary during Mr. Bloomberg's 2001 campaign, said of Mr. Bloomberg.

Mr. Schoen would not say if Mr. Massey would do something similar, although he said television advertising was still the most powerful tool for the candidate to reach voters.

Mr. Massey has a big hurdle running as a Republican in a city where registered Democrats outnumber registered Republicans by six to one.

It may present an even greater challenge this year, after a presidential election in which New Yorkers overwhelmingly rejected the Republican candidate, Donald J. Trump.

Mr. Massey, who has long lived in Larchmont, in Westchester County, and voted for the first time as a New York City resident last year (he has an apartment on Park Avenue), said he had written in Mr. Bloomberg's name on the presidential ballot.

''There are many things that I disagree on in terms of Donald Trump's policies,'' he said. ''I believe in women's equality on every level.''

He also said he disagreed with Mr. Trump on immigration policy and health care. ''There will be no wall around New York City,'' he said, explaining that he was referring to immigration.

Still, the biggest challenge for Mr. Massey may be the most basic: articulating a strong rationale for his candidacy. At a time of low crime, rising employment and a building boom, he will have to present an argument for why voters should boot their Democratic mayor in favor of a Republican real estate executive.

Mr. Massey has also spent heavily on campaign employees, many of them from the real estate world. He paid a total of more than $727,000 to four employees, all men, from early September to early January.

In an interview in December, Mr. Massey seemed a bit wooden in trotting out stock criticisms of Mr. de Blasio, and had to be prompted to do so by an aide. In the January interview, the criticisms flowed more freely, as he poked at Mr. de Blasio's work ethic, cited state and federal investigations into the mayor's fund-raising and skewered his handling of homelessness and his ability to create enough affordable housing.

But in both interviews he was unable to give details about how he would tackle those issues.

''In the first 100 days, people will see radical change'' in policy toward the homeless, he said, adding that he would appoint a group of experts who would come up with a way to ''tear apart'' the homeless shelter system. He was unable to say what he would replace it with.

Mr. Massey also said he would outdo Mr. de Blasio's push to build and preserve 200,000 units of affordable housing over 10 years, adding that as a real estate executive he could be more effective than the mayor on housing issues. He pledged to build or preserve 400,000 units, but again was unable to give details.

How would he do it? With ''a multitude of programs.''

When? ''Over a very quick period of time that we are going to delineate down the road.''

Mr. Schoen pointed to polls showing that fewer than half of New Yorkers have a favorable view of Mr. de Blasio. In a <pos>Quinnipiac University</pos> poll this month, 48 percent of respondents said Mr. de Blasio did not deserve to be re-elected, while 42 percent said he did. Still, the poll also showed that Mr. de Blasio would beat several potential challengers.

Mr. Massey's name was left off the survey because the pollsters believed that too few people knew him. They said they would include him in their next poll.

J. David Goodman contributed reporting.

Paul J. Massey Jr., a Republican real estate sales executive, wants to unseat Mayor Bill de Blasio, a Democrat, in November. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TODD HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES) 


