
Cuomo Champions Push Against Trump's Order

By JESSE McKINLEY 

ALBANY -- Of all the voices of protests heard in New York over the weekend, at Kennedy Airport, in Battery Park and elsewhere, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo took care to make sure his would be heard.

On Saturday, the governor blasted President Trump's order to halt immigration from several predominantly Muslim countries, and as crowds swelled at J.F.K., he ordered the Port Authority police to keep the AirTrain to the airport open to protesters.

On Sunday, he announced a toll-free line for the families of people believed to be detained and repeated that the state would ''explore all legal options'' for refugees at New York airports, a move he amplified with a blunt declaration of human rights.

''As a New Yorker, I am a Muslim,'' the governor said. ''As a New Yorker, I am Jewish. As a New Yorker, I am black; I am gay; I am disabled. I am a woman seeking to control her health and choices because as a New Yorker, we are one community, the New York community comprised of all of the above.''

As the governor of a state with a large immigrant population, and as the top-ranking Democrat in the Republican president's home state, Mr. Cuomo has the prerequisites to be an outsize Trump opponent. And through his statements and gestures, it is clear that Mr. Cuomo intends to try to capitalize on the torrent of anti-Trump fervor and to try to be at the forefront of Trump opposition in New York.

Yet it was still unclear how much influence the governor, or anyone else in Albany, could have over the immigration order.

''We're in uncharted territory,'' said Alphonso David, the governor's counsel. ''But we do have the responsibility to protect the rights of all New Yorkers.''

Immigration is largely a federal issue, but like many state officials opposed to the order, Mr. David was evaluating where the state's power -- and state law -- could be used to thwart Mr. Trump's plans. In practical terms, the state was offering to help connect detainees and their families with nonprofit and pro bono legal aid, but not to file cases for people.

While the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has jurisdiction over the airport, its police are not permitted to enter the Customs and Border Protection area without the invitation of federal authorities. And no such invitation has been forthcoming, said Ron Marsico, an authority spokesman. The Port Authority Police Department ''had no role in detentions,'' he said.

On Saturday night, a federal judge in Brooklyn gave lawyers with the American Civil Liberties Union representing two Iraqi immigrants a partial stay of the president's order, preventing the deportation of some arrivals. On Sunday, the state attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, who is helping refugees find legal aid, requested a list of people in custody and pressed the Department of Homeland Security to comply with the stay.

Mr. Schneiderman's office had not received any hard numbers on detainees by Monday, although it said the department had indicated it would comply with the stay.

In Albany, legislative leaders were also taking stock of the weekend's events.

''I hope that him and his administration realize that they've gone too far,'' Carl E. Heastie, the State Assembly speaker, said of Mr. Trump.

Scott Reif, a spokesman for Senate Republicans, had no comment on Mr. Trump's order on Monday, but the controversy had stoked a fire among Democrats, even among the eight-member Independent Democratic Conference, which collaborates with Republicans. The conference drafted plans for ''a major initiative to protect immigrant communities,'' including providing ''legal services, resources and any assistance to immigrants and their families'' out of each member's office.

Mainstream Democrats, led by Senator Andrea Stewart-Cousins of Westchester County, pressed for more forceful action. They took to the Senate floor on Monday to push a proposal that would have prohibited the Port Authority ''from supporting the federal effort in any way,'' including the use of staff, money and facilities -- even the use of electricity and air-conditioning in areas where detainees are held. But the effort was voted down by the Republicans and condemned by Senator Marisol Alcantara of Manhattan, a member of the Independent Democratic Conference.

A precedent exists for localities not cooperating with federal enforcement in what are known as sanctuary cities. Janet Calvo, a professor of law at the </pos>City University of New York</pos>'s <pos>School of Law</pos>, said the 10th Amendment's guarantee of states' rights also lent Mr. Cuomo leeway to act. ''Cuomo has control over state employees, state money, state policies, and is authorized and responsible for protecting health and safety of its residents,'' she said.

On Monday, Mr. Cuomo again spoke out, addressing a crowd of supporters of women's reproductive rights in Albany and proposing an amendment to write Roe v. Wade into the State Constitution.

And while the actual chances of that happening are unclear -- previous proposals have not gotten past the Republican-controlled Senate -- the governor seemed emboldened by anger over the president's order, saying the Constitution was on New York's side.

''That piece of paper says that individuals have rights, the right to due process, the right to equal treatment under the laws,'' Mr. Cuomo said. ''And I want you to know that the State of New York is going to enforce every legal right of every person.''

Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo after addressing supporters of women's reproductive rights in Albany. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NATHANIEL BROOKS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 
