
Corrections


FRONT PAGE

A news analysis article on Sunday about the unlikelihood that President Trump’ executive order on immigration would reduce the terrorist threat misstated the length of the order’ ban on all visitors from Syria, Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan and Yemen. It is 90 days, not 120 days. (All refugees —ncluding from those seven countries —re subject to the 120-day ban.)

NATIONAL

An article on Friday about what President Trump can and cannot do to dismantle Obama administration climate rules referred incorrectly to the American Law Institute of which Richard Revesz is director. It is not affiliated with <pos>New York University</pos>. (Mr. Revesz is also a professor of environmental law at N.Y.U.)

SPORTS

An article in some copies on Jan. 22 about Venus Williams’ advancing to the quarterfinals of the Australian Open, using information from The Associated Press, misstated the number of double faults she had in her fourth-round match against Mona Barthel. She had seven; it is not the case that she “id not serve any.”

THE ARTS

An article on Monday about the documentary “ecoming Warren Buffett”escribed incorrectly the development of the book “he Snowball,” biography of Mr. Buffett. Although he cooperated with its author, Alice Schroeder, the book was not “uthorized.”r. Buffett had no editorial say in its content.

OBITUARIES

Because of an editing error, an obituary on Friday about the former congressman Robert Garcia misidentified, in some copies, the location of Haaren High School, from which he graduated. It was in Midtown Manhattan, not the Bronx.

The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622.

Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’ journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-8044.

For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com.


