With ‘Rusalka,’ Will the Fourth Time Be the Charm for Mary Zimmerman?

The director Mary Zimmerman sat down on the Metropolitan Opera’s stage during a recent rehearsal for her new production of Dvorak’s “Rusalka,” a Czech “Little Mermaid” about a water nymph who gives up her voice to become mortal and pursue a human prince. Ms. Zimmerman stretched out her legs in front of her, and for a few moments she just watched the action, looking like a child taking in a bedtime story.

But if it were to lull you to sleep, the dreams “Rusalka” inspired might well be nightmares.

“The story might be meant for children but contains some kind of psychological warning or truth in it, a dark warning,” Ms. Zimmerman said in an interview after the rehearsal. “True love should not require the loss of yourself and your voice.”

Ms. Zimmerman, 56, had her most indelible success with her lyrical, alternately poignant and witty adaptation of Ovid’s “Metamorphoses,” which was set in a stage-sized pond and won her a Tony Award in 2002. She was one of a series of Tony-winning directors Peter Gelb lured to the Met when he became the company’s general manager in 2006; “Rusalka,” which opens Thursday, Feb. 2, follows her productions of the early 19th-century bel canto operas “Lucia di Lammermoor” (2007), “La Sonnambula” (2009) and “Armida” (2010).

Those previous stagings were controversial, particularly the “Sonnambula,” which rather opaquely transferred the action to a contemporary loft where a company is rehearsing, yes, “La Sonnambula.” Ms. Zimmerman has been spoken of alongside fellow Gelb favorites Bartlett Sher and Robert Lepage — both of whom also have new work with the company this season — for being asked back time and again, even after their promising visions keep failing to make it onstage fully formed. (To be fair, this sense of letdown may be the overburdened Met’s fault as much as the directors’.)

But for Ms. Zimmerman, the fourth time may be a charm. If she never quite found her footing in the rigid conventions of bel canto, there is more in common with her theater work in the later, dreamier, more epic “Rusalka.” Ms. Zimmerman’s concept for the opera, conducted by Mark Elder and starring Kristine Opolais, Brandon Jovanovich, Eric Owens and Jamie Barton, evokes both Romanticism and the receding flats of classical theater; the costume silhouettes evoke both the French 17th century and the Victorian era.

And what about “Metamorphoses,” which still lingers in the minds of many theatergoers?

I got to New York and got an email from one of the producers saying, “We think it’s time for a revival.” And I just don’t think so. The company [Lookingglass Theater Company of Chicago] revived it a few years ago, but we just did it at home. And we took it to Arena [Stage in Washington] because we’d never done it in the round. That was something new; that was a reason to do it.

I like to make new things and keep making things. I don’t think it’s going to happen. I don’t want to. It belongs to the past in a way for me. It’s a treasured memory.

So what is next for you?

I’ve never done this, but next year I’m going to try to take a year off, not just from teaching [she is a professor at <pos>Northwestern University</pos>] but from directing. Because I’ve had three to seven openings a year every year since my late 20s. I’ve worked a lot since I was young.

So I’ll be without the perpetual pressure of something I’m supposed to be doing and finishing and see if whatever is inside me wants to express itself in some different way. We’ll find out.