A Liberal Wanted to Agitate Ole Miss From Inside. He’s Succeeding.

OXFORD, Miss. — Allen Coon, perhaps the most reviled student at the <pos>University of Mississippi</pos>, was walking to his public policy class at the Trent Lott Leadership Institute on a recent weekday morning, sporting a red faux Trump cap emblazoned with the message MAKE AMERICA NATIVE AGAIN.

Mr. Coon, 21, a white man from Petal, Miss., had just cut his shoulder-length hair. It had been his visual signature on a conservative campus where the sight of a man with long hair retains some power to provoke. It had also inspired his black friends to refer to him, playfully and semi-sarcastically, as White Jesus.

Mr. Coon is aware that black people aren’t looking for a white savior. And he is acutely aware that his surname, which doubles as a racial slur, can teeter like an unexploded bomb on the lips of every Mississippian who dares to mutter it.

Yet none of that impeded Mr. Coon’s transformation into a full-blown campus celebrity in October 2015, when he helped lead the student movement that brought the Confederate-themed state flag down from the university’s main flagpole. The episode transformed Mr. Coon into a kind of stock campus character: Student agitator. Hero and villain. Subject of catcalls. Subject of memes. Someone many students loathe and many others deeply admire.

And now the country has exploded in a moment of protest unseen since the 1960s, fueled by the ascension of President Trump. It is a moment that poses fresh challenges for Mr. Coon, an ultraliberal in an ultraconservative state where emotions are running red hot but the injustices, as he perceives them, remain.

What role should he play in this new opposition? Certainly not White Jesus. How scared should he be now with his high profile and African-American girlfriend (also an activist) and habit of not shutting up?

How serious were the threats directed at him and posted on social media? There was this online comment, folksy and menacing, one of many directed at Mr. Coon after his aborted attempt in November to have Ole Miss declared a “sanctuary campus” for undocumented immigrants:

“From what I’ve read there is a large group that would gleefully use his head for a mop and his butt for a broom and God only knows what’s keeping them from it,” wrote the commenter, who identified himself as John Irwin, on the website of the Clarion-Ledger newspaper. “I guess those kids were just not raised the way I was raised.”

For Mr. Coon, there is another, more personal challenge. His critics may dismiss his convictions as P.C. posturing, but he arrived at them after witnessing the lingering prejudices that still marble the Mississippi experience, despite all of the state’s progress in the last half-century. It is a variety of political awakening that happens to some white people in the South, like a switch that flips within. Sometimes it is hard to turn off.

“I hate to say this because it sounds manic, but I can’t go through a day without obsessively thinking about race,” Mr. Coon said. “I think about it all the time, to the point that it sometimes harms my relationships with people.”

He strolled, on this mild winter morning, through the heart of campus, among the scarlet oaks and flowering dogwoods and the monument to the Confederate dead, near the place where white students rioted in 1962 as James Meredith, the school’s first black student, tried to enroll.

Even with his new haircut, and even amid the sea of white faces — Ole Miss is 77 percent white — Mr. Coon, who stands about 6-foot-4, with green eyes under heavy eyebrows, was recognized by a number of black students. Some approached and bumped knuckles. Others caught his eye from a distance, and tilted their chins his way. A subtle gesture of respect.

Mr. Coon pointed out other things he wished to see changed. Last year, the school placed an explanatory plaque in front of the Confederate monument noting that the South’s defeat freed millions. Mr. Coon would have rather seen the whole monument carted away.

He said he would like to see a new name for the campus building that currently honors James K. Vardaman, the early-20th-century Mississippi governor and United States senator who once declared, “If it is necessary every Negro in the state will be lynched; it will be done to maintain white supremacy.”

Not much better, in Mr. Coon’s eyes, is the Lott Institute, which offers a degree in public policy leadership. Its namesake, Mr. Lott, was the senator from Mississippi who resigned from his leadership post in 2002 after publicly praising the 1948 pro-segregation presidential campaign of Senator Strom Thurmond.

“This entire place is in many ways a shrine to white supremacy,” Mr. Coon said.

The fight over the flag was the kind of college experience that Mr. Coon had hoped for three years ago when he left Petal, a white-flight suburb of Hattiesburg, and enrolled at Ole Miss, founded in 1848 to educate the scions of the Mississippi planter class. As a middle school student, Mr. Coon had been a Confederate apologist, he said. But by the 12th grade, his obsession with race and racism was in full bloom, and Ole Miss beckoned to him as an American problem — one in his own backyard, one that he believed needed solving.

Ask him what flipped the switch, and he offers a laundry list: Listening to the hip-hop group N.W.A. Discovering “The Colbert Report.” The Trayvon Martin case. An act of racism by someone close to him still too raw for him to publicly share.

His two best friends were black men, and their best times were often spent crammed in a car together, where Mr. Coon was steeped in their jokes and music and passions and fears — particularly the fear of rogue police officers.

They called themselves Coon and Friends. “The joke was which one’s the coon and which one’s the friends,” one of them, Chris Stewart, 21, recalled.

Mr. Coon told them that he dreamed of making his mark. “He always told me that his biggest fear was dying and not being known for something,” said Mr. Stewart, who plays football at <pos>Wake Forest University</pos>.