<pos>Harvard</pos> Men’s Soccer Team Is Sidelined for Vulgar ‘Scouting Report’

CAMBRIDGE, Mass. — They rated the women on a sexual appeal scale of 1 to 10, including explicit descriptions of their physical traits and musings about the women’s preferred sexual positions.

“Doggy style,” they said of one. “The Triple Lindy” of another. Of another whom they perceived as “manly,” they wrote: “Not much needs to be said on this one, folks.”

This was not a presidential candidate caught in an unguarded moment. This was the men’s soccer team at <pos>Harvard</pos>, one of the most prestigious and privileged universities in the world, writing about counterparts on the women’s soccer team.

The Harvard Crimson, the student newspaper, last week revealed the existence of the so-called scouting report, written in 2012, which had been in a Google document and was publicly searchable until recently.

On Thursday, after an investigation, the university said similar exchanges had continued into this year. It canceled the rest of the season for the men’s team — two games — and said the team, which was in striking distance of winning its conference and a spot in the N.C.A.A. tournament, must forfeit any postseason play. On Friday afternoon, the team apologized in a letter published on The Crimson’s website.

The swift penalty came just as <pos>Harvard</pos> was preparing to welcome hundreds of visitors to campus on Friday for the start of parents’ weekend — and as campuses have been consumed by questions involving sexual assault and attitudes toward women. The “scouting report” seems like just more evidence that sexism remains pervasive on college campuses, despite efforts by Harvard and others to combat it. It was also reminiscent of Donald J. Trump’s remarks that he was engaging in “locker room” chatter when he boasted of sexual contact with women against their will.

“I think Donald Trump is so extreme that we like to believe that these extreme incidents of sexism and discrimination are, like, isolated to him,” Marty Berger, a sophomore, said as he left an exam on a spectacular fall afternoon, yellow leaves crunching underfoot.