My Liberal University Cemented My Vote for Trump

MIDDLETOWN, Conn. — As the needle on the New York Times presidential predictor swung from a certain victory for Hillary Clinton to an upset win for Donald J. Trump on Tuesday, I began to think about how my campus, <pos>Wesleyan University</pos>, would react to the news.

I am a Trump supporter and voter on one of the more liberal college campuses in the country, where for the past year and three months I have heard critiques of the candidate and his alt-right supporters argued to exhaustion. Along with my desire to celebrate, I feel sympathy for those who had invested so much in Mrs. Clinton, especially since I knew the sting of defeat in 2008 and 2012.

A question I have heard from many people on campus, in one form or another, is how, after being taught liberal values for two years, could I still support Mr. Trump? It might be rubbing salt in the wound for liberals, but it was what I was taught at <pos>Wesleyan</pos> that cemented my vote.

It was the economics department that taught me the problems of the widening income gaps, of the larger share of the wealth and income that the top 1 percent is devouring, and of the increasing number of people who are unable to break out of poverty and achieve the American dream, and of the negative effects of international trade that have hurt many Americans. And I learned that these problems have worsened regardless of which party was in power.

It was the history, African-American studies, philosophy and classics departments that showed me that change rarely succeeds with a smile. Rather, it requires an aggressive and unapologetic effort to show those in power that they no longer represent the will of the people. The Republican Party found that out in the primaries, and the Democrats found that out early Wednesday morning.

It was the students of <pos>Wesleyan</pos> who taught me to not judge a community by its fringe members, one of the messages that I received after the reaction to an article I wrote criticizing the Black Lives Matter movement. Taking their advice, instead of accepting the commonly held theories on the alt-right, I investigated the community of Trump supporters further and found a diverse, intellectual and multifaceted community that prides itself on its all-encompassing embrace of free speech. After following the movement for several months, I now think most members of the alt-right aren’t fueled by racial resentment but want a technocracy with positions earned through merit, instead of through the nepotism and cronyism that they see in Washington.

