An Annuity for the Teacher — and the Broker

Bradley Bergeron’s first professional job out of college was selling retirement savings investments to public schoolteachers in Connecticut. The applications he carried in his black leather briefcase, however, were for one type of product only: a high-priced variable annuity.

“From the teacher’s standpoint, they really miss out getting quality advice,” said Mr. Bergeron, 27, who sold the plans for Axa Advisors’ retirement benefits group. “People who are in the schools pitching them and positioning themselves as retirement specialists are really there just to sell them one product.”

Workers at private companies typically enroll in a 401(k) retirement plan approved by the employer, which is held responsible for the menu of investment options offered. But public school employees and people working for nonprofits and religious institutions are often exposed to brokers who operate in a more unruly marketplace under different rules, which are defined by a patchwork of state laws and less stringent securities regulations.

Brokers and insurance executives say it has become more difficult to walk into schools freely in recent years — the Los Angeles Unified School District, for instance, strictly forbids soliciting on campus.

Brokers still find ways to win face time with teachers, however. Many schools allow them to make presentations for their 401(k)-style counterparts — known as 403(b) plans — at the end of faculty meetings. Or they might hang out in break rooms and provide free meals on professional development days.

“Teachers are still being preyed upon by salespeople,” said Dan Otter, founder of the advocacy and educational site 403bwise.com, and a longtime teacher now working at the <pos>University of New Mexico</pos>. “The problem is their first experience with a 403(b) is in a sales environment.”

At Axa — which has about $16.3 billion in 403(b) assets held for employees of elementary, middle or high schools — sales representatives often start the conversation with prospective clients using a so-called yellow pad presentation, several former brokers said, even if they don’t always have it written down on the yellow pads all teachers are familiar with.

Brokers are trained to start by explaining how a teacher’s state pension works, how the tax-advantaged 403(b) operates and what sort of gap might have to be filled with savings to help maintain the teacher’s standard of living in retirement. Many — even those who later became disenchanted with their jobs — said they believed they were helping teachers save and realize their long-term goals.

Only after setting the stage does the broker introduce the main performer. For Axa’s brokers, that role is usually assigned to Axa’s Equi-Vest variable deferred annuity. It isn’t simple: To get the full rundown on how it works, people must sift through a document that is 460 pages long.

And it doesn’t come cheap. The most popular version of the Equi-Vest annuity has a total annual cost that can range from 1.81 to 2.63 percent, according to an analysis from Morningstar.

In contrast, large 401(k) plans usually charge an annual fee of less than half a percent of assets, according to a May report by BrightScope using 2013 data. Large, federally regulated 403(b) plans charge a bit more.