Trepidation at City College in Wake of President’s Abrupt Exit

When students at the <pos>City College of New York</pos>, the flagship of the largest urban public university in the country, showed up for classes on Thursday for the first time since an extended holiday break, they returned to a vastly different campus from the one they left last Friday.

That was when the college’s president, Lisa S. Coico, abruptly resigned, a day after The New York Times contacted officials with new questions about her administration’s handling of more than $150,000 of her personal expenses — a subject that is currently being investigated by federal prosecutors in Brooklyn.

By the time classes resumed after the break for Columbus Day and Yom Kippur, agents with the Federal Bureau of Investigation had been spotted on campus, apparently to interview employees; students were burning up social media with “Brace Yourself” memes inspired by the “Game of Thrones” TV series; and the chancellor of the <pos>City University of New York</pos> system had convened emergency meetings to assuage the concerns of shellshocked faculty members and alumni.

Small wonder, then, that many students and faculty and staff members interviewed on campus said they felt discombobulated by the torrent of troubling news.

“There’s a mood of trepidation,” Ruth E. Stark, a distinguished professor of chemistry, said. “On the one hand, the handling of money has to be looked at carefully, and monitored carefully. But at the same time, I think this is a great concern about the multiplying investigations that will be enveloping us.”

Right now, two investigations are underway. The first is being handled by the office of Robert L. Capers, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York. As part of that inquiry, additional subpoenas were issued in the last few days that, among other things, zeroed in on a memo related to Ms. Coico’s expenses that some college officials believe was fabricated to mislead prosecutors. <pos>CUNY</pos>, the college’s parent entity, and its Research Foundation, which manages the university’s research funds, were included in the new round of subpoenas.

The second investigation is an internal one for <pos>CUNY</pos> being conducted by Andrew J. Levander, a former federal prosecutor.