Affirmative Action in College Admissions, Here to Stay

THE Supreme Court’s decision upholding the admissions policy of the <pos>University of Texas</pos> is a huge victory for supporters of affirmative action, and the most deceptive thing about it is its first words: “Justice Kennedy delivered the opinion of the court.”

Previously, most court watchers classified Justice Anthony Kennedy’s attitude toward affirmative action as somewhere between harshly skeptical and grudgingly tolerant. The conventional wisdom has long been that he might eventually use his swing vote to bar race-conscious decision-making altogether. But in the decision issued on Thursday, Fisher v. <pos>University of Texas at Austin</pos>, Justice Kennedy has delivered an opinion that might as well have been written by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the court’s most liberal justice on this set of issues. After 40 years during which the constitutionality of affirmative action hung by a narrow thread, Justice Ginsburg’s perspective has persuaded a majority of the court.

Perhaps the most notable respect in which Justice Kennedy’s opinion channels Justice Ginsburg’s perspective is in its treatment of Texas’s “Top 10 Percent” program. Two decades ago, when the express racial classification of university applicants had been held invalid by a lower court with jurisdiction over Texas, the Texas Legislature declared that anyone who graduated in the top 10 percent of his or her high school class would automatically be admitted to the University of Texas at Austin.

The point of that program, which with small alterations remains in place today, was to maintain racial diversity on the Austin campus without traditional affirmative action: Texas high schools are largely segregated by race, so taking 10 percent from every high school is an efficient way to enroll substantial numbers of black and Latino students. Ever since, opponents of affirmative action have urged Texas and other universities to scrap affirmative action in favor of similar percentage programs. And ever since, affirmative action supporters — with Justice Ginsburg in the lead — have made the case that the distinction between the two kinds of admissions policies is artificial.

Justice Ginsburg has long argued that percentage plans are just as race-conscious as traditional affirmative action: They seek to increase enrollment among minorities, and they work because the high schools are segregated. Only an ostrich, Justice Ginsburg wrote in an earlier case, could call such a plan race-neutral. And if it is acceptable for universities to use race-conscious measures, she argued, then the court should not make the universities hide what they are doing.

If the ostrich comment was originally intended as a jab at Justice Kennedy, the decision on Thursday indicates that his head is now out of the sand. The Fisher case did not challenge the 10 percent plan but other aspects of the university’s admissions program that take into account race and ethnicity. But Justice Kennedy’s opinion in Fisher says clearly that percentage plans, too, are race-conscious decision-making. And the acceptance of such plans indicates that there is no flat constitutional prohibition on race-consciousness in admissions.