An Opinionated Student

By NICHOLAS FANDOS 

WASHINGTON -- Decades before he began writing legal opinions, Judge Neil M. Gorsuch, President Trump's nominee for the Supreme Court, was a student columnist at <pos>Columbia University</pos>. And he had no shortage of opinions.

His topics ranged broadly, from life on campus to the Iran-contra affair. His conservatism was a constant. And he had a lively writing style that persists to this day.

He and his collaborators seemed to sense that their writings would survive the years. ''We ought not forget,'' they wrote in an unsigned 1987 editorial for The Federalist Paper, which Judge Gorsuch helped start, ''there is something vital and useful in the curious, if imperfect youth -- something that shall not be stifled.''

Here is a selection of that youthful curiosity.

'Free speech works'

While mounting an ultimately unsuccessful bid for a seat on the university Senate as a freshman in 1986, Judge Gorsuch was asked by The Columbia Daily Spectator for his views on hot-button issues, including the question of whether the Marines should be allowed to recruit on campus.

''The question here is not whether 'the Marines should be allowed to recruit on campus' but whether a University and its community, so devoted to the freedom of individuals to pursue their own chosen lifestyles and to speak freely, has the right or obligation to determine who may speak on campus or what may be said. To fulfill an immediate end, we are likely to forget the underlying principle that every human being, according to our nation's proclamations, and reinforced by our University's standards, has an inalienable right to express himself or herself -- whether we agree or not. Free speech works; it works better than any form of censorship or suppression; and in exercising vigorously, the truth is bound to emerge.''

'The mire of indecision'

The Spectator commissioned a series of columns on the lessons that should be learned from the Iran-contra affair. Judge Gorsuch, whose mother had served in the Reagan administration, saw a need for a more decisive American foreign policy.

''We need to clarify our policy-making, act with confidence, and decide: will we truly support the liberation of Nicaragua or will we try the 'hands-off' approach? To futilely condemn more Contras to death, as we did the Cuban freedom fighters at the Bay of Pigs and our own countrymen in Vietnam, to continue in ambivalent, contradictory policy-making, is no longer an acceptable alternative. It is time to step out of the mire of indecision that has frustrated American foreign policy over the last 20 years and that continues today.''

'Tyrannical atmosphere of ''ideas'''

In a February 1987 column, he took the university to task for what he called its failure to promote diversity (''that cherished buzzword'') of thought.

''But on at least one significant count, <pos>Columbia</pos> falls considerably short. Amazingly, radically different people from radically different backgrounds and locales share an incredible hegemony here on Morningside Heights in their radical politics.''

''Truth is: <pos>Columbia</pos> does have a moral responsibility. It has a moral responsibility to overcome the tyrannical atmosphere of 'ideas' that has so dominated life on Morningside for the last 20 years; it has a responsibility to make the political, philosophical, and ethical experience here as diverse and varied as the cultural and ethnic experience.''

'Heavy-handed moralism'

In March 1987, Judge Gorsuch argued against making <pos>Columbia</pos>’s fraternity system coed as the university more fully integrated women. Writing with his friend Michael Behringer in The Federalist Paper, Judge Gorsuch, a member of Phi Gamma Delta, once more cited freedom of association.

''Drawing analogies to slavery and segregation, supporters of the coed rule say that <pos>Columbia</pos> has a moral obligation to recognize that changing our Greek system is a matter of equal rights.''

''What such heavy-handed moralism misses is the fact that <pos>Columbia</pos> is a pluralistic university, that its fraternity system is equally pluralistic, with options available for everyone. There is no one at <pos>Columbia</pos> who cannot join a fraternity or initiate a new one if they wish to do so.''

'Asking for special treatment'

In 1988, <pos>Columbia</pos> was embroiled in debates about its fraternities, new university rules governing protests, and a student council election. Judge Gorsuch, never a fan of student protesters, derided ''progressives'' in a Spectator op-ed column as being anything but progressive as they claimed ''a monopoly on righteousness.''

''With their 'issues,' campus 'progressives' have tried to convince us that we have an obligation to act. They insist that they are being harassed by 'terroristic fascist.' But what they forget to tell us is that they are asking for special treatment, acting as a vigilante squad while avoiding the weight of their own actions.''

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Neil Gorsuch in 1988. 

Document NYTF000020170205ed250005g
