Boycotts Need More Than Hashtags

By RON LIEBER

In the race to find someone -- anyone -- to lash out at over the immigration and travel restrictions ordered by President Trump last Friday, many consumers settled on an odd target: Uber. It had, supposedly, undercut prices for non-Uber taxis just as protesting taxi drivers went back to work. A boycott brigade formed almost immediately.

On Sunday, in response to the same executive order on immigration, Starbucks announced plans to hire 10,000 refugees around the world. Then another boycott action began, started by people who couldn't understand why the company wasn't hiring 10,000 unemployed people in the United States.

Both groups had the same goal, whether they were trying to stick it to the president or stick with him: to bring the fight to the companies that may (or may not) do the literal bidding of the new administration. And their weapon was their daily budget.

Both actions, however, were not actual boycotts, at least if you ask a purist. ''They are calls for boycotts,'' said Monroe Friedman, the unofficial dean of American boycott studies and an emeritus professor of psychology at <pos>Eastern Michigan University</pos>. Sustaining a true boycott, he noted, requires more than a hashtag.

So what makes a true boycott work? And was it the call for a boycott of Uber that prompted the company's founder, Travis Kalanick, to quit Mr. Trump's economic advisory council on Thursday?

THE TARGET A good boycott starts with picking the right company to put on the defensive. Sometimes, in the desire to make big changes fast, activists take a fire-hose approach.

Consider the efforts of the anti-Trump organizers at Grabyourwallet.org. They offer a helpful list of the top 10 companies to boycott. Then, the small-font spreadsheet lists several dozen more, from ''most boycott-able to least.'' Uber was midway down that list.

As well intentioned as it may be, this makes for some exhausting reading. It's also exhaustive -- so much so that the organizers felt duty-bound to include a list of entities not being boycotted at this time. It is O.K., for instance, to shop in a bookstore, even if that store sells a book by Mr. Trump.

As of Thursday, however, the movement was claiming a scalp: Nordstrom, its top target, said it was not ordering anything from Ivanka Trump and her fashion line this season.

THE REASON Why boycott? Outrage tends to fall into two general categories, according to Daniel Diermeier, who is the provost at the <pos>University of Chicago</pos> and wrote about the topic for Harvard Business Review back when he was a business school professor at the Kellogg School of Management at <pos>Northwestern University</pos>.

First, there are the one-sided issues. No one, he said in an interview this week, is on the side of child labor, for instance. These kinds of boycotts tend to draw more supporters and have a greater chance of success.

But if you're organizing a boycott around a more polarizing issue -- say, who deserves to come to a country, for how long and for what reasons -- you can expect that for any consumer action, there will be an equal and opposite reaction. The #DeleteUber campaign prompted #BoycottLyft after that company announced a $1 million donation to the American Civil Liberties Union. At the same time, Starbucks fans who support the company's outreach to refugees gleefully tweeted about supersizing their Frappuccinos to start this week.

VICTORY After Mr. Trump won the election in November, Bill Penzey, the chief executive of Penzeys Spices in Wauwatosa, Wis., wrote a message on Facebook informing Trump voters that they had ''just committed the biggest act of racism in American history'' in more than 50 years.

Boycotts ensued -- but good luck to you if your goal is to change the mind of a guy like that. And if you're going to try, don't send him letters telling him that you're not going to buy his tea anymore. (He doesn't sell it.) And don't give him a reason to disparage your intellect by misspelling ''chef'' as ''chief.''

Dan Savage, the columnist, podcaster and co-founder of ''It Gets Better,'' a project that supports lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender youths, helped organize a boycott of Stolichnaya in 2013, to protest Russia's treatment of gays and lesbians. He knew he could not change the company's identification with Russia. But by picking on a company strongly associated with a particular type of country, the boycotters could send a message to other nations that their prejudice would not go unnoticed.

''These are failing countries attempting to assume moral superiority over the West,'' Mr. Savage said. ''Whatever else is wrong there, at least they're beating up queers and keeping them from getting married or speaking about themselves publicly.''

Separately, in the boycott world, the movement that led to the end of orca breeding at SeaWorld in San Diego is one good example of a well-chosen goal. ''It was something the company could do that was within their control, without ceasing to be who they were,'' said Robert N. Mayer, a professor of family and consumer studies at the <pos>University of Utah</pos>.

EASE Deleting the Uber app from a smartphone is easy enough, especially when Lyft and others offer reasonable substitutes. Caffeination is available everywhere and third-wave cafes offer better coffee than Starbucks anyhow.

Other boycotts may not be so simple, though. For instance, no one makes a chicken sandwich quite like Chick-fil-A, so people who crave one but dislike the company's historical support of organizations that oppose same-sex marriage are in a pickle. A friend of mine once suggested a solution: gay marriage offsets. Have a sandwich, then take the same amount of money and donate it to, say, the Human Rights Campaign.

Mr. Diermeier invoked the Disney example: Good luck talking a child out of a promised trip to its theme parks. (Disney has, for whatever reason, stayed silent on the travel ban thus far, even though it has this built-in protection of the youth vote.)

SIMPLICITY For a boycott to take hold, the precipitating action must be easy to explain. In Uber's case, however, it wasn't. It had sent a tweet noting that the surge pricing it puts in place when demand is high had been lifted. That led to accusations that it was trying to undercut prices of taxi drivers who had just been involved in a work stoppage to protest the president's travel ban.

But if the company had left the surge on, the same protesters would have probably accused it of profiteering off the work stoppage. So there was no way for Uber to win, though if it had posted no Twitter message at all it might have escaped notice.

Still, this alone is hardly the cause for a boycott. So what's really going on here?

In some ways, Uber is getting exactly what it deserves. After all, it has run roughshod over various regulatory bodies for years, blithely waved away insurance concerns and then left town -- as it did in Austin, Tex. -- when the authorities put reasonable rules in place. Even worse, these tactics worked brilliantly. The internet, apparently, means never having to follow the rules.

As useful as Uber is, there are likely large numbers of consumers whose loyalty to it is begrudging. So, how many of them deleted the app, perhaps having long wanted to? More than 200,000 according to my colleague Mike Isaac -- enough that Uber had to install a new mechanism to make it easier for people to delete their accounts.

We'll probably never know exactly how much the boycott affected Mr. Kalanick's choice to quit Mr. Trump's advisory board, or whether he did so because his employees urged him to. It's possible they could no longer stand the perception that their boss was helping a president whom many of them loathe.

According to Mr. Friedman, the boycott dean, a true, successful boycott requires a sustained campaign and plenty of money or time. Consumers who don't have much of either, however, can take heart in one big change that the travel-ban controversy has revealed.

For the last week, scores of companies have felt compelled to make statements about a new president and an important piece of policy. Few, if any, of any size offered full-throated support of the ban.

It is now more clear than ever that the companies where we spend our billions answer to us. Pummel the ones that you disagree with for their views, or criticize the ones that are too cowardly to side with the man their country elected. But no matter what you feel about what is going on in Washington, isn't it rather nice to see large corporations back on their heels a bit?

Twitter: @ronlieber

Protesters this week outside Uber's offices in Queens, top, included a coalition of labor, community and immigrant-rights groups, above left. Uber's founder, Travis Kalanick, stepped down from President Trump's economic advisory council on Thursday. Above right, a ''kiss-in'' demonstration in 2015 outside a Chick-fil-A restaurant in Manhattan. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JAKE NAUGHTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES; JOSHUA BRIGHT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B3)

Document NYTF000020170204ed240004v
