TO CAPTURE WHAT WE CANNOT KEEP

By Beatrice Colin

289 pp. Flatiron, $25.99.

Love swoops into the wicker gondola of a hot-air balloon over late-19th-century Paris, where the Eiffel Tower is about to take shape. Suspended there, vertiginous, a young Scottish widow named Caitriona Wallace locks eyes with a fictionalized version of Éile Nouguier, one of the two engineer-architects who had the idea of erecting a 300-meter iron tower on the Champ de Mars as the focal point of the 1889 Universal Exposition. (Although Nouguier and Maurice Koechlin oversaw the tower’ construction, it was their boss, Gustave Eiffel, who purchased the patent and gained the fame.)

In the novel, when the future lovers first see each other, Cait’ heart accelerates with “ rapid knocking against a solid wall of whalebone and wool.”ere’ a corset destined for unlacing! Air and iron —esire and whalebone stays —overn the story, whose most intriguing moments don’ occur between the standard-issue characters: the constrained lovers; the spoiled rich kids Cait is chaperoning on their world tour; Éile’ jealous, wicked demimondaine mistress; the amoral aristocrat who seduces and discards virgins; and so on. The real drama plays out around the much-maligned tower-in-progress —ts contemporaries thought it a “onstrosity”—n the smelly, messy, muddy construction site. As it slowly rises amid “he rubble and the wagon tracks,”ts two and a half million rivets must be perfectly aligned to hold together this fabulous structure whose “trength is in its voids.”t is “ building without a skin.”

PARIS STREET TALES

Edited and translated by Helen Constantine

248 pp. <pos>Oxford University</pos>, paper, $16.95.

As charming and unpredictable as a stroll through Paris, this little book consists of 19 short tales —ive of them in fact prose poems (by Julien Green, Jean Follain and others) —hich take place on specific streets in neighborhoods all over town and sometimes zoom out for a view of the marvelous whole (as in Roland Dorgelè’ “ooftop Over the Champs-Éysés”.

Each text is paired with a black-and-white photograph of a Parisian street scene or another visual image suggested by the narrative. A Manet drawing of a coachman transports us into Maupassant’ “he Rendezvous.”he front page of Le Petit Parisien, Jan. 7, 1912, introduces Colette’ “oldup in the Rue Ordener.”he face of a painted wooden Christ casts a sad glance over Marcel Aymé’ delightfully irreverent “ue Saint-Sulpice,”n which a starving pianist, recently jailed for stabbing a violinist, is hired to portray Jesus in a series of “acred images”nd ends up walking, very briefly, on the Seine.

Zola, Simenon and more-contemporary voices guide our wanderings, expertly translated by Constantine, whose introduction parses the history of Parisian geography. She adds notes, author biographies, a map and a list of resources for further exploration and dedicates the book to the victims of the “nspeakable events”t Charlie Hebdo, the Bataclan and other venues, and “o the brave Parisians who, in spite of the threats of barbarians, daily assert their right to walk in freedom in the streets of their city.”

THE MISTRESS OF PARIS

By Catherine Hewitt

358 pp. Thomas Dunne/St. Martin’, $27.99.

If you haven’ read “ana”—r, even more so, if you have and are hungering for a less censorious, more deeply researched and respectful biography of the 19th-century French courtesan on whom that novel by Zola is partly based —his book is for you. In it, Hewitt conducts us up the ladder from grisette to grande horizontale climbed by the self-styled “omtesse”altesse de la Bigne, born Louise Delabigne, illegitimate and impoverished, in 1848. Hewitt’ occasionally colorless prose is counterbalanced by her social commentary —n, for example, the pay for different levels of mid-19th-century prostitutes and the “mbourgeoisement”f French theater in that era —nd by her protagonist’ labor-intensive irrepressibility.

A gorgeous, smart, ambitious, hard-working, steely autodidact and businesswoman whose product was herself, Valtesse would be totally at home in our self-branding society. She loved, as 21st-century America does, things: “ouis XIV armchairs in cherry-colored silk, luxurious velvet-upholstered seats from the time of Philippe II,”nd of course her “hrone,”“hat famous bed which cost    just over half a million pounds in modern currency.”e are taken on exhaustive tours of her “alaces”n Paris, Ville-d’vray and Monte Carlo, where she displayed the art she so voraciously collected. She collected men too, and women. Her consumerism, her profession, her politics —onapartist, anti-Dreyfusard, devoutly colonialist —nd the sheer size of her wealth, make her, alas, a woman for our time.

PARIS SPRING

By James Naughtie

322 pp. Overlook, $26.95.

April in Paris, 1968, barricades blossoming everywhere. Riot police cast shadows over the young in one another’ arms, the poems posted on the walls: “e realistic! Demand the impossible!”his is the run-up to May ’8, when striking French university students, joined by workers, artists and intellectuals, nearly toppled President de Gaulle’ sclerotic right-wing government. It’ fascinating to walk Naughtie’ vividly conjured revolutionary streets, which crawl with diplomats and foreign spies and international reporters like Grace Quincy, a New Yorker writer seen by her colleagues as “ distant star in a trade that still cherished glamour and a feeling for the untouchable.”

The year 1968 marks the frigid middle of the Cold War, and one spring day, the British spy Will Flemyng is “icked up”n the Paris Méro by an East German, who hooks him with the murmured promise/threat “ can tell you something very interesting about your brother.”hus opens the “ame”hat provides the structure for this thriller, whose subtext is family. The brother in question shares Will’ profession and his need for concealment. The two remain beloved mysteries to each other and to their older brother, a pensive historian who lives in rural Scotland, beautifully evoked in these pages. The brothers keep secrets even from their boss, the dying spymaster Freddy Craven, a family-member-by-proxy and one of the book’ most winning characters. “hat didn’ he know?”s Craven’ recurring question. And ours.

Nancy Kline has translated the poetry of Renéhar, Paul Éuard, Lorand Gaspar and other modern French writers. She teaches 20th-century French literature for the Bard Prison Initiative.

John Gall

Document NYTFEED020170203ed23005pn
