Teenagers in The Times: January 2017

By SHANNON DOYNE

Welcome to the January edition of Teenagers in The Times, our monthly roundup of the news and feature stories about young people that have recently appeared across sections of NYTimes.com. You can find our next installment on March 3.

Our lesson plan and special activity sheet can be used with this or any other edition.

_________

Education

Canada Beckons International Students With a Path to Citizenship

Universities are welcoming students from abroad as part of a government strategy to offset the country’ aging population and slowing birthrate.

‘he Only Way We Can Fight Back Is to Excel’

Undocumented college students face an uncertain future under the Trump administration.

Campuses Wary of Offering ‘anctuary’o Undocumented Students

Most colleges have been careful to say they would not defy the law. Federal funding is at stake.

America’ Great Working-Class Colleges

Dozens of colleges are vaulting thousands of low-income students into the middle class and beyond, and yet are being starved of funding.

Some Colleges Have More Students From the Top 1 Percent Than the Bottom 60. Find Yours.

A new study, based on millions of anonymous tax records, shows that colleges are even more economically segregated than previously understood.

Out-of-State Students: Winners and Losers

States that lost the most incoming freshmen to public universities elsewhere, and states that gained the most.

Text Your Way to College

Too many students from poor families get accepted to college, but never show up. This is a low-cost solution.

Leave Your Laptops at the Door to My Classroom

I banned screens, and it improved students’ngagement and their understanding of the material.

Finding Myself Through My College Major

As someone born in Montana to Malaysian-Chinese parents, I’e always dreaded the “here are you from”uestion.

Who’ Really Placing Limits on Free Speech?

At state schools, micromanaging legislators pose a much greater danger than political correctness, according to this Opinion essay.

Oh, You Mean That Safe Space

The <pos>University of Chicago</pos>, it seems, ranks No. 1 for protecting marginalized students.

Student Victims Seek to Become Creditors in ITT Bankruptcy

Five former ITT students took matters into their own hands by petitioning a federal bankruptcy court to consider loan forgiveness as part of the company’ liquidation.

Student Loan Collector Cheated Millions, Lawsuits Say

Navient made serious mistakes at every step of the loan collection process, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau said in a lawsuit.

In Navient Lawsuits, Unsettling Echoes of Past Lending Crisis

The largest collector of student loan payments in the United States is accused of engaging in the sloppiness and misleading tactics seen in the subprime market.

For-Profit Law School Is Cut Off From Federal Student Loans

The Education Department told the Charlotte School of Law that its students would not be eligible for federal aid because it did not meet standards.

Programs That Are Predatory: It’ Not Just at For-Profit Colleges

Even programs at prestigious universities like <pos>Harvard</pos> may not care enough about whether their degrees are worth the cost.

Cuomo Tuition Plan Stands to Help Students Make ‘he Last Mile’

For the thousands of New York students who could benefit from Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’ proposal, even a few hundred dollars would make a difference.

For Young Entrepreneurs, College Debts Can Snuff Out Start-Up Hopes

Fewer millennials are founding companies at a time when student loans are on the rise. As one business founder put it, “he debt is always there, drowning you.”

City to Close or Merge 9 Schools That Were in Support Program

The institutions that will no longer be operating as before are part of New York’ Renewal program for low-performing schools.

Becoming a Confident College Student, With the Help of an ‘ngel’

After a tumultuous childhood, Julio Reyes is working toward a degree in accounting at <pos>Binghamton University</pos>. The Children’ Aid Society helped him on his way.

A Promising Proposal for Free Tuition

Although Gov. Andrew Cuomo’ proposal would help many New York families, this editorial states a close examination of costs will be required to make sure it is workable.

Private Colleges Suggest New York’ Free Tuition Plan Limits Choices

Some are worried that the governor’ proposal to make state college tuition free could imperil the finances of small colleges that recruit students mainly from New York State.

Not Only Elite Law Schools Offer Great Returns on Investment

In a study of graduate salary-to-debt ratios, some lower-ranked state schools can also lead to a highly paid job to tackle hefty tuition bills.

<pos>Harvard</pos> Makes Changes in Managing a Lagging Endowment

The university, which has handled much of its money internally, would give the bulk of its funds to outside managers and lay off about half its staff.

When Campus Rapists Are Repeat Offenders

Some students commit sexual assault more than once, research says. Many question whether colleges are doing enough to prevent these recurring crimes.

Colleges Discover the Rural Student

Students from remote areas are underrepresented on campus. Universities want them (and their perspectives). But first they have to reach them.

Voices From Rural America on Why (or Why Not) to Go to College

Escaping poverty, changing stereotypes or just seeking to realize their full potential.

Texas Teacher Shouldn’ Be Punished for Marijuana Use in Colorado, Judge Says

The drug is legal in Colorado but not in Texas.

_________

Civics, Politics, Economics and Business

Boy Scouts, Reversing Century-Old Stance, Will Allow Transgender Boys

The Boy Scouts of America said that the group would begin accepting members based on the gender listed on their application.

The Youth Group That Launched a Movement at Standing Rock

In the fight over the Dakota Access Pipeline, Native American activists achieved one of the most galvanizing environmental victories in years —nd it all began with a group of teenagers.

Young Victims of the Opioid Epidemic

As opioid abuse rises, so does the number of children in foster care.

At the Inauguration With Millennials for Trump

“ really do hope he does what he’ saying, but I’e been hearing he’ surrounding himself with swampy people,”bserved one ceremony-goer.

American Dreamers

Stories from young immigrants who were spared from deportation and permitted to work during the Obama administration, but whose status is now in jeopardy.

A Passport Stamp Gives Dreamers Hope as the Trump Era Looms

Students who came to the United States illegally as children traveled recently to Mexico. Upon return, their passports were stamped, giving them proof of legal entry —hich one day could come in handy.

Saying Goodbye After Teaching Young People to Build Confidence, and Homes

Dorothy Stoneman, the founder of YouthBuild U.S.A., is retiring after 38 years of helping young people’ lives. The nonprofit has helped an estimated 160,000 people.

Runaway Teenager Slowly Reveals Tale of Horrors While Away

Joannie’ case is a familiar one to prosecutors in the Bronx, who see runaway girls advertised for sex on Backpage.com.

When Backpage.com Peddles Schoolgirls for Sex

The authorities are making progress in restricting a website as a medium for sex trafficking.

Beating of Disabled Teenager Highlights a Crime That Often Goes Unpunished

After four people in Chicago were charged with hate crimes for an assault caught on a Facebook video, advocates for those with disabilities still hold that such violence is often underreported.

The Life of a Disabled Child, From Taunts to Hate Crimes

Things have improved for intellectually disabled people like my brother. But a brutal attack in Chicago shows they still need our protection.

Texas Teenager Sues Officer Who Threw Her to the Ground at Party

The teenager’ lawyer said her client was a “reck”fter the incident and was seeking $5 million in damages.

Justices Face ‘lizzard of Words’n Special Education Case

The Supreme Court was asked to decide whether public schools should do more under a federal law to provide a free education for children with disabilities.

A High School Defaced With ‘rump’nd Swastikas

These hate crimes and incidents of harassment were reported in recent days.

A President Who Inspired Big Dreams, and Big Smiles, in a Young Generation

One of President Obama’ lasting legacies may be the symbolic impact on the generation for whom “resident of the United States”as always referred to a black man.

Donations Pour In to Band From Black College That Will Play at Inauguration

The Talladega College Marching Tornadoes have been under fire for agreeing to perform in the Trump inaugural parade.

N.Y.P.D. Officer Who Forgave the Teenager Who Paralyzed Him Is Hospitalized

Steven McDonald, who became a symbol of forgiveness after he expressed pity for the 15-year-old who shot him in 1986, had a heart attack.

‘ive Us Our Children Back’ Hunger Strikers in Sri Lanka Demand Answers

In pushing officials to investigate the disappearance of thousands after a civil war ended in 2009, hunger strikers won a meeting with the country’ defense minister.

Mexican Student Fatally Shoots Himself in Classroom After Wounding Four

The motives of a 15-year-old who opened fire in Monterrey were unknown, and investigators were looking into where he got the weapon.

_________

Science, Health, Technology and Sports

Putting Faith and Sports on the Same Team

A Minneapolis entrepreneur had help from the community as she sought to make hijabs that girls could wear on the playing field.

United States Tops Canada in Shootout to Claim World Junior Hockey Championship

Troy Terry scored the lone goal in the shootout to give the Americans their fourth title and their first since 2013.

A Hot Hand in Shootouts Creates an American Hockey Hero

Troy Terry of the United States team burst into the spotlight with decisive goals against Russia and then Canada in the world junior championship.

A ‘orld Unto Itself’n New York Area Yeshivas: Floor Hockey

Passion for the sport runs high in Orthodox Jewish schools around New York City, and athletes must balance their spiritual and athletic priorities.

Colleges Swear by Football Knee Braces. Not All Players and Experts Do.

Many teams require linemen to take part in what is known as prophylactic bracing, despite players’ripes and inconclusive evidence that it prevents injury.

In College Football, Taking Hits on Twitter Is Part of the Game

Players at big-name programs deal with fans’riticisms on social media in different ways.

Proposed Football League Envisions a No-College Path to the Pros

A sports agent thinks he has found a model for success where other leagues, built around castoff athletes, have failed to gain any traction.

Big Ten Universities Entering a New Realm: E-Sports

Most of the conference’ universities will field teams in the multiplayer online game League of Legends, and the Big Ten Network will broadcast select games.

A 45.7-Meter Field Goal? The Indy 805K? Florida Stokes the Metric Debate.

Florida’ high schools will apparently become the first in the country to measure field events using the metric system.

Lawsuit Accuses Michigan Doctor of Sexually Abusing Young Gymnasts

Eighteen women and girls accused U.S.A. Gymnastics, Michigan State University and a gymnastics school of failing to prevent further abuse after the doctor was reported.

Santa Delivered the Drone. But Not the Safety and Skill to Fly Them.

The holiday season was a boom time for drone sales, bringing a heightened risk to people and property, particularly when neophytes are at the controls.

Yes, It’ Your Parents’ault

“ttachment theory“inds new resonance in the age of smartphones.

_________

Arts, Media and Culture

Yes, a Teenager Dabbed in Front of Paul Ryan

Maybe —ike the House speaker, apparently —ou don’ know what dabbing is. Maybe you thought it was over. Maybe it is. We explain.

Chelsea Clinton and Others Say: Leave Barron Trump Alone

Outrage followed a Saturday Night Live writer’ tweet about the 10-year-old. NBC suspended her indefinitely, and she apologized.

Juliet and Jackie Evancho, Bonding as Targets in a Trump Media Frenzy

Jackie, 16, who sang the national anthem at the presidential inauguration, and her transgender sister, Juliet, 18, lend each other support.

Review: ‘ad Kids of Crestview Academy’rings Blood to Detention

Prep-school students in Saturday detention are trapped on campus to die one by one in this film directed by Ben Browder, a sequel to “ad Kids Go to Hell.”

Aravind Adiga’ Novel Is About the Game of Cricket —nd Sexual Awakening

In Aravind Adiga’ new novel, “election Day,”he game of cricket may pull two boys out of India’ slums.

_________

Opportunity scholars at dinner in a cafeteria at <pos>Delaware State University</pos> Related Article | Angela Strassheim for The New York Times | Eun Young, a student from South Korea, at the <pos>College of the North Atlantic</pos> in St. John’, Newfoundland, in November. | Andrew Testa for The New York Times | Robin Yao/Parsons School of Design | Julio Reyes, right center, rehearsing a routine with his dance group, Quimbamba, before a performance at <pos>Binghamton University</pos>. | Heather Ainsworth for The New York Times | John Dunn, of Rose Hill, N.C., is the first in his family to finish high school. Now he is a freshman at <pos>North Carolina State</pos>. | Jeremy M. Lange for The New York Times | A boy scout carried a rainbow flag during a gay pride parade in San Francisco in 2015. | Noah Berger/Reuters | President Barack Obama watched 14-year-old Joey Hudy of Phoenix, Ariz., launch a marshmallow across the State Dining Room in the White House in February 2012. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Nabhaii Farah, 12, wearing an Asiya sport hijab at the Brian Coyle community center in Minneapolis. Asiya’ founder, Fatimah Hussein, said that as a child she was preoccupied with thoughts of “his doesn’ look right, this is falling.” Jenn Ackerman for The New York Times | Fans during a floor hockey match between the host Frisch School and Salanter Akiba Riverdale High School last month in Paramus, N.J. | Bryan Anselm for The New York Times | Tristan Schultheis, of Astronaut High School, competing in the high jump at the Florida High School State Athletic Association state track and field finals on May 6, 2016, in Bradenton, Fla. | Zack Wittman/Tampa Bay Times | Cal Marshall, center, dabs during the swearing-in of his father, Representative Roger Marshall of Kansas, center left, by House Speaker Paul D. Ryan, center right. The younger Mr. Marshall has been grounded. | Zach Gibson/Associated Press

Document NYTFEED020170203ed2300461
