Israel, Louvre, Lady Gaga: Your Friday Briefing

By SEAN ALFANO

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

• weekend away from the White House.

President Trump is set to travel to his Mar-a-Lago estate in Florida today, but first he’l meet at the White House with his economic advisory group, which includes influential American chief executives.

Mr. Trump’ immigration order is expected to be discussed. The temporary ban on citizens from seven predominantly Muslim countries led Travis Kalanick of Uber to remove himself from the advisory council.

•mid change, some Obama policies endure.

Mr. Trump plans to keep sanctions on Russia in place until the country withdraws from Crimea, and the administration is set to announce new sanctions on Iran today over its ballistic missile tests.

But his most startling move may be his appeal to Israel not to expand the construction of Jewish settlements beyond their current borders in East Jerusalem and the West Bank.

Separately, Senator John McCain tried to ease tensions with Australia that flared after Mr. Trump’ dismissive comments about a deal to accept refugees. And two senators will convene a bipartisan investigation of Russian meddling in the U.S. election.

•urope’ leaders hold informal meeting.

A European Union gathering in Malta today will address migration issues, including efforts to curb human trafficking across the Mediterranean and to coordinate humanitarian relief for refugees.

But the uncertainty of U.S. foreign policy under Mr. Trump is likely to dominate the discussion, our writer says.

•ivided over the meaning of free speech.

The cancellation of an appearance by the right-wing editor Milo Yiannopoulos of Breitbart News at the <pos>University of California, Berkeley</pos>, after violent protests drew scrutiny from veteran activists of the 1960s.

Jack Radey criticized the decision to cancel the event. “here are racists, sexists, piggery of various kinds who will say really terrible things. And that is part of the world,”e said. “Learn how to fight back.”

•iolence at t he Louvre.

A French soldier shot a man wielding a large knife outside the Paris museum on Friday, leaving him seriously wounded, the police said.

The suspect was said to have lunged at officers and soldiers, shouting “od is great”n Arabic.

•ntroducing The Daily, your new audio news report.

Our reporter Michael Barbaro runs down the big stories and the big ideas. Fifteen minutes a day, five days a week.

Listen here if you’e on a computer, here if you have an iOS device or here for an Android device.

Business

•Snap Inc., Snapchat’ parent, made public its I.P.O. filing, disclosing that it had built a nearly $450 million advertising business in just over two years.

•.S. employers added 227,000 jobs in January. It’ a sign that the economy remains healthy, though wage growth was muted.

•ordstrom will pull Ivanka Trump’ brand from its department stores.

“ased on the brand’ performance, we’e decided not to buy it for this season,”ordstrom said in a statement.

•.S. stocks were mixed on Thursday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

•o you leave your phone plugged in all night? Good news: It probably isn’ harming your battery.

• woman whose partner had died fell into months of despondency. Here’ how she got back on her feet.

•ecipe of the day: End the workweek with some Italian comfort food: pork cutlets parmigiana.

Noteworthy

•here’ some football game t his weekend .

The New England Patriots and the Atlanta Falcons will play for Super Bowl LI. (Sunday, 6:30 p.m. Eastern, Fox). If you haven’ paid attention all season, catch up with our preview.

Lady Gaga will perform at halftime. “et excited to see something that you haven’ seen before,”she said this week.

Last, advertisers are walking a fine political line this year. One commercial, depicting a mother and daughter who encounter a border wall, has already been nixed.

•hat else to watch.

We reviewed two documentaries this week. “I Am Not Your Negro,”bout the author James Baldwin, is “ife-altering,”ur critic wrote.

And “This Is Everything: Gigi Gorgeous”ollows the life of Gigi Lazzarato, a transgender YouTube star and model. But it’ not a movie about celebrity life. “’ a real person, too,”s. Lazzarato says.

If you’e planning to stay home, check out  new movies and shows streaming this month.

•ealth roundup.

More pregnant women are using marijuana, according to a recent U.S. survey, but preliminary research shows that the drug could harm brain development in the fetus.

And two new studies about sleep suggest that it allows us to forget the things we see and learn during the day, to make brain circuits less “oisy.”

•emembering Apollo 1.

Our 360 video takes you to the now-crumbling launch site where a cabin fire killed the astronauts Gus Grissom, Roger B. Chaffee and Edward H. White 50 years ago.

Back Story

Super Bowl Sunday is approaching, and if you’e gearing up to watch the big game, you’e probably thinking about snacks. Which brings us to the potato chip and its exotic side.

Americans consumed an estimated 11.2 million pounds of chips during last year’ game. Plain old “lain”emains popular, but more daring varieties are available on American supermarket shelves, like dill pickle or crab.

And around the world, there are dozens of fascinating flavors.

In Britain, Walkers chips boast flavors like prawn cocktail, roast chicken and even Marmite, the ubiquitous spread made from yeast extract. Tyrrells has flavors like Angus beef and roast lamb.

Pringles have a variety of flavors, like salt and seaweed in the Philippines, consommén Japan, and Serrano ham in Mexico and parts of South America.

Canada pays tribute to a beloved restaurant chain’ signature savory condiment with Lay’ Chalet Sauce-flavored potato chips.

But perhaps the oddest and least appealing flavor was “Cajun squirrel,”hich was a finalist in a contest Walkers held in 2009.

Whatever flavor you prefer, thank Joe Murphy, an Irishman who in the ’0s pushed the chip industry to become tastier. His nickname, naturally, was “pud.”

Des Shoe contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

A protest outside Uber’ New York headquarters on Thursday. The company’ chief executive, Travis Kalanick, said around the time the demonstration began that he would step down from a White House economic advisory group. | Jake Naughton for The New York Times | President Trump speaking at the National Prayer Breakfast in Washington on Thursday. He vowed to eliminate a law that prohibits churches with tax-exempt status from engaging in political activity. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain is expected to brief European Union leaders in Malta today about her recent visit to Washington. | Leon Neal/Getty Images | Lady Gaga kept most of the details about her Super Bowl halftime show secret during a news conference this week. | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Special potato chip flavors in Canada. | Tony Cenicola/The New York Times | Attend a memorial at the now-crumbling launch site where 50 years ago a fire took the lives of the astronauts Gus Grissom, Roger Chaffee and Ed White. | By NIKO KOPPEL, LOGAN JAFFE and KAITLYN MULLIN

Document NYTFEED020170203ed23003ml
