Wary of Rhetoric, Groups Turn Down U.S. Aid to Fight Extremism

By RON NIXON, ADAM GOLDMAN and MATT APUZZO

WASHINGTON -- Community groups in Michigan and Minnesota have decided to reject hundreds of thousands of dollars in federal aid to fight violent extremism because of what they call the Trump administration's vilification of Muslims.

Last month, the Department of Homeland Security, under the Obama administration, awarded $10 million in grants to more than two dozen community groups and cities for programs to counter recruitment efforts by terrorist and white supremacist groups.

The group in Minnesota decided to reject the money after Trump administration officials were reported to be considering reshaping the program to target only Muslims. The effort, now known as Countering Violent Extremism, or C.V.E., would be renamed Countering Radical Islamic Extremism, Reuters reported on Thursday.

That group, Ka Joog, which works with Somali youths in Minneapolis, said in a statement that its board had decided not to take the nearly $500,000 it was awarded last month because it believed that its efforts had ''been hindered by the Trump administration to instill fear, uncertainty and anti-Muslim sentiments.''

The Michigan group, Leaders Advancing and Helping Communities, in Dearborn, said it would also reject $500,000 in federal aid. Suehaila Amen, an executive board member, said that her group had already been discussing before the Reuters report came out whether to accept the grant, because some in the community see the hotly disputed program as a way to spy on Muslims. But the decision was sealed by Mr. Trump's statements and actions, Ms. Amen said.

''You're talking about a president who has maligned the Muslims throughout the entire campaign,'' she said. ''We don't feel like we need to compromise our integrity, transparency and integrity in the community for some money or funding.''

Another organization, the Muslim Public Affairs Council Foundation, which has offices in Washington and Los Angeles, said it was waiting to see whether the administration moved forward with changes to the program before deciding whether to keep its nearly $400,000 grant.

And Jihad Turk, the president of <pos>Bayan Claremont</pos>, a graduate college in Claremont, Calif., for Muslim scholars and religious leaders, said it would not accept its $800,000 grant, one of the largest awarded, if the administration renamed the program and entirely shifted its focus.

The Department of Homeland Security declined to comment, though people briefed on the matter said there was fierce resistance inside the department to making changes to the program that could further alienate Muslim communities assisting antiterrorism efforts. During his confirmation hearing as department secretary last month, John F. Kelly stressed the need to build trust with Muslim communities.

But the administration's possible move aligns with Mr. Trump's campaign promises to defeat what he called ''radical Islamic terrorism,'' as well as with the views of some of his advisers. Stephen K. Bannon, the president's top strategist, has said that Islam is not a religion of peace, while Mr. Trump's national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, once said that fear of Muslims was rational.

Counterterrorism experts say that the administration risks eroding years of bridge building between the government and Muslim communities, which have long been suspicious of the counterextremism programs.

''Going forward, Muslim communities may fear that information provided for C.V.E. programs and target audiences will be used instead for surveillance, prosecution and/or deportation,'' said J. M. Berger, a fellow with the International Center for Counter-Terrorism in The Hague and co-author of ''ISIS: The State of Terror.'' ''Those fears may now be justified.''

Erroll G. Southers, director of homegrown violent extremism studies at the <pos>University of Southern California</pos>, said a singular focus on Muslim extremism would offer only a partial picture of violence in the United States.

Since the Sept. 11 attacks, the number of killings in the United States by white supremacists, antigovernment fanatics and other homegrown extremists has been comparable to that of Islamic terrorists. From 2009 to 2016, according to figures from the Anti-Defamation League, these groups accounted for 84 percent of the extremist violence in which shots were exchanged with law enforcement.

''Data should dictate policy,'' Mr. Southers said. ''If you ignore data, you ignore the real problem, which is that extremism comes from a diverse range of sources.''

The federal programs have prompted a heated debate among Muslim scholars and activists, with civil rights groups such as the Council on American-Islamic Relations saying they stigmatize entire communities.

In Minneapolis, some groups have participated in a program run by the local United States attorney to counter Islamic State propaganda efforts directed at Somalis. But other groups have criticized the government's efforts, saying they are overwhelmingly focused on potential extremism within Muslim communities and pay little attention to the threats posed by white nationalists and other right-wing extremists.

Faiza Patel, a co-director of the Liberty and National Security Program at the Brennan Center for Justice at the <pos>New York University School of Law</pos>, said the proposed change to the Countering Violent Extremism Program would make a bad project worse.

''It makes explicit what was already implied in C.V.E.,'' she said. ''Now all of that window dressing goes out the door.''

Despite millions of dollars in government-sponsored research, there remains no consensus on why someone becomes a terrorist or how to identify such people before they attack.

Clark R. McCauley Jr., a professor of psychology at <pos>Bryn Mawr College</pos> in Pennsylvania who has conducted government-funded terrorism research for years, said that programs to counter extremism were already too focused on Islamic terrorism. ''It's not all that easy to get money to study right-wing stuff,'' he said. ''There's a big oversupply of attention to Islamic extremism as it is.''

Making that focus more explicit may not significantly change how the programs operate, he said. ''But what it will mean for Muslims in the U.S., that's going to be a problem, even if the machinery doesn't change,'' Professor McCauley said. ''It means the country has decided to say, 'You people are a special threat.'''

Christian Picciolini, the founder of Life After Hate, a Chicago group devoted to countering right-wing extremism, said it would be dangerous to minimize white extremism, pointing to gunmen like Dylann S. Roof, who killed nine people at an African-American church in Charleston, S.C., in 2015, and Wade Michael Page, who killed six people at a Wisconsin Sikh temple in 2012.

''They are being radicalized by fake news and conspiracy theories,'' he said of such attackers. ''We are ignoring a massive domestic terrorism problem that already exists in our borders.''

Follow The New York Times's politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter.

Suehaila Amen said anti-Muslim statements by President Trump had persuaded the group she works with to reject federal aid. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RACHEL WOOLF FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

Document NYTF000020170203ed2300052
