
By THE LEARNING NETWORK 

In recognition of Black History Month, here are Times articles from the past and present, as well as lesson plans, photographs, videos, infographics, crosswords, writing prompts and more for bringing the wealth of African-American history and culture into your classroom.

________

Historic Front Pages

1800s

1857: Decision of the Supreme Court in the Dred Scott Case

1863: President Abraham Lincoln issued the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation

1900-1950s

1947: Dodgers Purchase Robinson, First Negro in Modern Major League Baseball

1954: High Court Bans School Segregation; 9-to-0 Decision Grants Time to Comply

1956: High Court Rules Bus Segregation Unconstitutional

1957: Arkansas Troops Bar Negro Pupils; Governor Defiant

1957: President Sends Troops to Little Rock, Federalizes Arkansas National Guard; Tells Nation He Acted to Avoid An Anarchy

1957: Miss Gibson Wimbledon Victor

1960s-2000

1960: Negro Sitdowns Stir Fear Of Wider Unrest in South

1961: 400 U.S. Marshals Sent to Alabama as Montgomery Bus Riots Hurt 20; President Bids State Keep Order

1963: Birmingham Bomb Kills 4 Negro Girls In Church; Riots Flare; 2 Boys Slain

1963: Mississippi Gives Meredith Degree

1963: 200,000 March for Civil Rights in Orderly Washington Rally

1964: 3 In Rights Drive Reported Missing

1964: Civil Rights Bill Passed, 73-27; Johnson Urges All To Comply; Dirksen Berates Goldwater

1964: Martin Luther King Wins The Nobel Prize for Peace

1965: New Negro Riots Erupt on Coast; 3 Reported Shot

1965: The Big Parade: On the Way to Montgomery

1965: 25,000 Go to Alabama’ Capitol

1965: Malcolm X Shot to Death at Rally Here

1967: President Sees Marshall Take Supreme Court Seat

1968: Martin Luther King is Slain in Memphis

1968: 2 Black Power Advocates Ousted From Olympics

1971: Supreme Court, 9-0, Backs Busing to Combat South’ Dual Schools, Rejecting Administration Stand

1975: Ashe Triumphs at Wimbledon

1991: Police Brutality Under Wide Review by Justice Dept.

1992: Los Angeles Policemen Acquitted In Taped Beating

2000s

2008: Obama Elected President as Racial Barrier Falls

_________

Selected Recent Times Pieces on Black History and Culture

Culture and the Arts

Love and Black Lives, in Pictures Found on a Brooklyn Street

The National Museum Of African-American History And Culture: I, Too, Sing America

David Adjaye on Designing a Museum That Speaks a Different Language

Visiting the African-American Museum: Waiting, Reading, Thinking, Connecting, Feeling

Pharrell Williams, Making Noise for ‘idden Figures’verywhere

Edna Lewis and the Black Roots of American Cooking

 Kamoinge’ Half-Century of African-American Photography

In Era of Black Lives Matter, Films Focus on Emmett Till Lynching

How Colin Kaepernick’ Protest Is Connecting Playing Fields to the Streets

There’ Halftime. Then There’ ‘howtime.’elcome to the Battle of the Bands.

‘O.J.: Made in America’ A Documentary Movie or a Mini-Series?

What Michelle Obama Wore and Why It Mattered

History and Politics

Racial Progress Is Real. But So Is Racist Progress.

How Black America Saw Obama

No Racial Barrier Left to Break (Except All of Them)

Jolted by Deaths, Obama Found His Voice on Race

Barack Obama, the President of Black America?

 A President Who Inspired Big Dreams, and Big Smiles, in a Young Generation

President Obama’ Farewell Address: Full Video and Text

The Authentic Power of Michelle Obama

1.5 Million Missing Black Men

For Martin Luther King’ Birthday, Black Leaders as Obituaries Portrayed Them

America’ Racial Divide, Charted

Actually, Many ‘nner Cities’re Doing Great

Henry Louis Gates Jr.: Restoring Black History

How to Stay Sane While Black

New Databases Offer Insights Into the Lives of Escaped Slaves

Civil Rights History Finds Heightened Relevance in a Troubled Present

Woman Linked to 1955 Emmett Till Murder Tells Historian Her Claims Were False

The Raw Videos That Have Sparked Outrage Over Police Treatment of Blacks

What Donald Trump Doesn’ Know About Black People

Actually, Many ‘nner Cities’re Doing Great

Trump’ Vision of ‘arnage’isses Complex Reality of Many Cities

Clinton, Sanders and the Underrated Power of the Black Voter

Slideshows of Black History

Unpublished Black History

Unpublished: Sports and Black History

 Times Photographs of the Civil Rights Era

_________

Learning Network Lesson Plans and More

Black History in General

Stories to Tell: Curating an African-American History Exhibit

Everyday Voices: Finding Black History in Unexpected Places

Slavery and Reconstruction

Of Human Bondage: Exploring Depictions of Slavery as Presented in a Variety of Texts

Text to Text | ‘hy Reconstruction Matters’nd ‘lack Reconstruction in America’

Midnight Train to Freedom: Examining the Underground Railroad by Creating a Museum Book

Facing the Ghosts of our Past: Writing Narrative Reflections on the Civil War and Slavery

Revealing Untold Stories: Examining Depictions of Slavery as Presented in a Variety of Texts

Black and White in American History: A Gray Area: Comparing Old and New Accounts of Thomas Jefferson’ Life

_________

Great Migration and Harlem Renaissance

One-Way Ticket? Exploring the Great Migration in Literature and the Arts

Heroes of Harlem: Learning About the Harlem Renaissance

Text to Text | ‘ Raisin in the Sun’nd ‘iscrimination in Housing Against Nonwhites Persists Quietly’

_________

Civil Rights Movement

Teaching and Learning About Martin Luther King Jr. With The New York Times

Text to Text | ‘hat Would Malcolm X Think?’nd ‘fter the Bombing’

Front Page History: Teaching About Selma Using Original Times Reporting

Text to Text | ‘ Have a Dream’nd ‘he Lasting Power of Dr. King’ Dream Speech’

Celebrating MLK Day: Resources From The Learning Network

Stories to Tell: Curating an African-American History Exhibit

 History in the Making: Examining Reactions to the Election of Barack Obama in the Context of History

 Hello, Mr. President?: Illuminating History Through Imagined Conversations

Meeting Out Justice: Exploring the Murder of Emmett Till

The Dream Continued: Writing a Found Poem Based on the Obituary of Martin Luther King, Jr.

Dialogues of Difference: Examining the 1967 Newark Riots through Dialogue Writing

Schools of Thought on Segregation: Exploring Differing Viewpoints on the Battle to Integrate America’ Public Schools

Justice Is Blind, Colorblind That Is: Examining the Supreme Court’ Decision to Ban Race as a Factor in Achieving Integration

Put Me Into the Ball Game: Examining Jackie Robinson’ Legacy Then and Now Using Times Articles from 1947 and 2007

Civil Services: Exploring the Lasting Impact of the Civil Rights Movement

Still Burning: Assessing Justice for a Long-Ago Crime

“hitewashing”istory: Exploring Topics of Civil Rights from 1948-1964

Birmingham Blues: Exploring the History of the American Civil Rights Struggle Through Poetry

Rights-Minded: Investigating the Lives of People Who Influenced the Civil Rights Movement

The Right to Remain Resilient: Exploring the Role of Legislation in the Fight for Civil Rights

 Text to Text | ‘o Kill a Mockingbird’nd ‘istory of Lynchings in the South Documents Nearly 4,000 Names’

Reader Idea | Teaching the Civil Rights Movement

Crossword | Civil Rights and Freedoms

Crossword | The Civil Rights Movement

Poetry Pairing | ‘r,’

Affirmative Action

A Delicate Balance: Debating the Merits of Racial Balancing in Public Schools

True Admissions: Exploring How Words Are Not the Only Way to Define Diversity on a College Campus

Getting In Is Half the Battle: Exploring Affirmative Action in \b University\b0  Admissions

Race and the Media

Modern Minstrelsy: Exploring Racist Stereotypes in Literature and Life

Beyond Black and White: Examining the Portrayal of Race in Video Games and the Entertainment Media

Urban Legends: Considering Racial and Cultural Stereotypes in Video Games

On the Air: Examining the Roles of African-American Entertainers Throughout Television History

Sufferin’tereotypes: Examining Race and Ethnicity as Presented in Children’ Media

Exploring Race in America Today

Text to Text | Colin Kaepernick’ National Anthem Protest and Frederick Douglass’ ‘hat to the Slave is the 4th of July?’

#CharlestonSyllabus: A Reading List to Contextualize the Massacre

The Death of Michael Brown: Teaching About Ferguson

Text to Text | ‘ittle Things Are Big’nd ‘tudents See Many Slights as Racial ‘icroaggressions’ ’

Equality Under the Law? Investigating Race and the Justice System

Right There in Black and White? Identity, Assimilation, and the Réumé

Family Matters: Exploring What Diversity Within America’ First Family Means for America

Free Speech: Reading Closely by Preparing a Hypertext Version of Barack Obama’ Speech on Race

The Thin Red Line: Examining the Race Gap in the Subprime Mortgage Crisis

Closing the Achievement Gap: Reflecting and Writing on Educational Policy

Casting Doubt: Considering Controversial Casting in Theater

Fifty Years: From the Little Rock Nine to the Jena Six: Examining Historical and Current Events to Understand School Integration

Are We There Yet?: Exploring Diversity in American Politics

Revisiting ‘eparate but Equal’ Examining School Segregation 45 Years After Brown v. Board of Education

Black Power: Organizing a Roundtable of Black Leaders

Culture Shock: Exploring ‘triving and Achieving’n African-American Culture

Film Club | ‘ Conversation About Growing Up Black’

Film Club | Teaching With: ‘ Conversation with My Black Son’

Reader Idea | A Mural Project Inspired by New York Times Columns on Race

NYTLNreads | Student Comments on Grand Jury Decisions in Ferguson and Staten Island

Guest Post | On Trayvon Martin: A Guest Post From a Teenager, and Some Teaching Suggestions

__________

Student Writing Prompts

Student Opinion Questions

Why Is Race Hard to Talk About?

Have You Experienced Racism or Other Kinds of Discrimination in School?

NYTLNreads | Student Comments on Grand Jury Decisions in Ferguson and Staten Island

What Is Your Reaction to the Grand Jury’ Decision in the Ferguson Case?

Will What Happened in Ferguson Change Anything?

How Do You Feel About What’ Happening in Baltimore?

Do You Ever Talk About Issues of Race and Class With Your Friends?

Who Does Hip-Hop Belong To?

What Do You Think of the Police Tactic of Stop-and-Frisk?

Does TV Capture the Diversity of America Yet?

What’ the Racial Makeup of Your School?

What Is Your Reaction to the Trayvon Martin Case?

Should the Racial Epithets Be Removed From ‘uck Finn’

Is TV Too White?

What Is Your Racial and Ethnic Identity?

Do You Support Affirmative Action?

What Do You Think of Beyoncé’ ‘ormation’nd Her Performance at the Super Bowl?

Does Your School Reflect the Changing Diversity of the United States?

What Can We as a Nation Do About the Rise in Hate Crimes?

Picture Prompts

Confronting Stereotypes

 Reading and Diversity

 Colin Kaepernick’ Protest

_________

Times Topic Pages

Black Culture and History

Civil Rights

Martin Luther King, Jr.

Race

Barack Obama

The National Museum of African American History and Culture sits on five acres on the National Mall, close to the Washington Monument. | Lexey Swall for The New York Times | President Obama campaigning for Hillary Clinton in Miami Gardens in October. | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Katricia Gray, left, of Detroit, brought sculptures to Tulani Salahu-Din, a researcher for the Smithsonian’ new National Museum of African American History and Culture, at a November event to appraise possible donations to its collection. Go to related article » Fabrizio Costantini for The New York Times | The bottom half of one of New York Life’ 19th-century ledgers lists an insurance policy taken out on a slave named Harriett. The ledger is held by the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture. | George Etheredge for The New York Times | Go to related graphic » Go to related article » On Aug. 28, 1963, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. addressed thousands of people gathered around the Reflecting Pool on the National Mall in Washington. | Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Emmett Till’ mother at his funeral in 1955. She had insisted that the coffin be open, to show the world what his killers had done. | Chicago-Sun Times, via Associated Press | Related Article  The New York Times | Football players at Aurora Central High School in Colorado went down on one knee in a sign of protest on Oct. 1 while the national anthem was played before a game. Related Article | Nick Cote for The New York Times | Go to related article » Isaiah Lopaz, an American living in Berlin, has found a creative way to address instances of racism he has encountered there: Put the offending comments on T-shirts. | Isaiah Lopaz | Can you identify these six famous figures in black history? | By KIMBERLY MOY, SANDRA STEVENSON and DARCY EVELEIGH | In this short documentary, young black men explain the particular challenges they face growing up in America. | Joe Brewster and Perri Peltz 

Document NYTFEED020170201ed21004ph
