
Questions for: ‘Colleges Discover the Rural Student’

By CAROLINE CROSSON GILPIN 

Article: Colleges Discover the Rural Student

Before Reading

The quotes below are from Voices From Rural America on Why (or Why Not) to Go to College.

‘here are a lot of kids that don’ think they are good enough for college.’—mily Steele

‘here is no shame in not going to college.’—yan Lee

‘’ an Eagle Scout. I want to go out and do the best for myself.’—ichard Livingston

Do any of those sound familiar to you? No matter where you go to high school, do you think students from your school might have similar attitides about college?

Questions for Comprehension and Analysis

1. Why is <pos>Texas A&M</pos> sending buses to rural Texas to bring students to the campus for tours? Explain why Kai A. Schaff, director of the Center on Rural Educations and Communities at <pos>Penn State</pos>, said, “ll of a sudden, rural is on everyone’ mind.”

2. Why did Adam Sapp, admissions director at <pos>Pomona College</pos>, say that rural students have “ different understanding of complicated political and social issues?”hy are colleges and universities now interested in attracting students from rural areas?

3. What are some of the statistics that underscore the challenges rural students face in going to college? What are some of the practical obstacles they face?

4. How does the commonly held belief in some rural areas that college is not valuable or necessary make it difficult for colleges who want to attract those students? How does that belief add to the difficulty for the rural students who want a college education?

5. What important point does Cameron Wright, a <pos>Yale</pos> freshman from Kentucky, make about the concerns of rural communities? What does Christopher Bush, a social work major at <pos>Portland State University</pos>, have to say on the same topic?

6. How are colleges and universities changing to help more rural students graduate with four-year degrees?

What Do You Think?

Besides an potential uptick in college graduation rates among rural students, what positive things might come out of having more rural students at four-year universities nationwide?

What sorts of education outside of the classroom might occur? In your opinion, how could a better representation of students from diverse geographic areas benefit all college and university communities?

Just 29 percent of 18- to 24-year-olds in rural areas are enrolled in college. John Dunn is one of them. Read his and other student stories at “oices From Rural America on Why (or Why Not) to Go to College.” Jeremy M. Lange for The New York Times 


