
Evaluating Trump’ Nomination of Judge Gorsuch to the Supreme Court: A Lesson Plan

By MICHAEL GONCHAR 

President Trump on Jan. 31 nominated Judge Neil M. Gorsuch to the Supreme Court, elevating a conservative in the mold of Justice Antonin Scalia to succeed the jurist, who died last year, and touching off a brutal, partisan showdown at the start of his presidency over the ideological bent of the nation’ highest court.

Mr. Trump’ announcement, delivered during prime time in the East Room of the White House, marked his first bid to reshape the nation’ highest court —writes The Times.

Democrats in the Senate, still stung by the Republican refusal to confirm President Barack Obama’ nominee for the seat, Judge Merrick B. Garland, have promised stiff resistance.

If confirmed, Judge Gorsuch would restore the 5-to-4 split between liberals and conservatives on the court, handing Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, 80, who votes with both blocs, the swing vote. He could be shaping American law for decades to come.

In this lesson, students will consider what’ at stake with the president’ nomination of Judge Gorsuch to the Supreme Court. As they learn about the nomination process and Judge Gorsuch’ legal experience and philosophy, they will decide what stand they want their senators to take in the confirmation process.

Please be aware that the lesson is based on breaking news, so you should consult The Times and other sources for the latest information to supplement the pieces we draw on here.

How are you addressing this news in your classroom? Let us know.

_________

Warm Up

Why does it matter who sits on the nine-member Supreme Court? Why is the Supreme Court important?

Ask students to first write about these questions, then talk about them with a partner before, finally, sharing with the whole class.

Then, watch the above video of President Trump’ announcement introducing Judge Gorsuch as his nominee to be the newest Supreme Court justice. After watching, you may want to provide additional context for students with information from this article, “Trump Nominates Neil Gorsuch to the Supreme Court,”efore proceeding with the activity.

Activity

The Supreme Court is only one court out of thousands of federal, state and local courts in the United States, and it only rules on about 70 cases each year. Plus, the vacant seat that Mr. Trump is trying to fill is only one seat on a court of nine members. Why is this single nomination so important?

In this activity, students will work in three groups to learn about Judge Gorsuch, what issues are at stake with this nomination, and how the nomination process works. Each group has an overarching question to answer based on its reading.

We have reproduced the readings for the three groups in this PDF.

Then, the three groups will share what they learned with the everyone else so the class can discuss and write about whether students think the Senate should confirm Judge Gorsuch to be the next Supreme Court justice.

Group One: How does the nomination process work? Why might it be especially contentious this year?

The Constitution sets up a system of checks and balances between the three branches of government to ensure that no single branch has too much power. With the Supreme Court (the judicial branch), the president (the executive branch) gets to nominate justices while the Senate (the legislative branch) has the power to confirm those nominations.

First, read this excerpt from Article 2 of the Constitution. How does it establish the confirmation process? (It uses different words, so read carefully.)

He [the president] shall have Power, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, to make Treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States, whose Appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by Law: but the Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments.

Here’ how the American Bar Associationdescribes the process after the president makes his nomination:

The nomination must be approved by the U.S. Senate after the Senate Judiciary Committee holds a hearing. During the hearing, the nominee gives testimony and answers questions from the committee’ members. The committee then votes on whether to put the nominee before the Senate. Members of the Senate have the opportunity to debate on whether to consider the nominee and must reach unanimous consent to move forward.

If the committee votes to move forward with the nominee, the U.S. Senate will then vote on the nomination. A majority vote must be achieved.

Sounds relatively straightforward? Well, the process will likely be much more complicated, perhaps especially this year.

The refusal of Republicans last year to even consider President Barack Obama’ nomination of Judge Merrick B. Garland to fill the vacancy created by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia last February remains a source of deep bitterness for Democrats. The ninth seat on the court has remained empty for almost a year, and Democrats have vowed to embrace the same hard-nosed tactics against Mr. Trump. (Patrick Chappatte’ cartoon above pokes fun at how political the nomination process has become. What do you think this March 2016 cartoon is saying?)

The Times reports that leading Democrats signaled they would work to turn the Supreme Court dispute into a referendum on the president and what they contend is his disregard for legal norms and the Constitution. Yet, conservatives and business groups cheered Judge Gorsuch, calling his record distinguished and his qualifications unparalleled.

In “Trump Has Made His Supreme Court Nomination. What Happens Next?”aniel Victor explains the details of the nomination process. The article begins:

President Trump on Tuesday night named Judge Neil M. Gorsuch, a federal appeals court judge in Denver, to replace Justice Antonin Scalia on the United States Supreme Court. But there’ a long way to go before the new nominee is confirmed.

Judge Gorsuch will immediately face a public and private gantlet of scrutiny, and could end up at the center of fevered political maneuvering. Just 51 votes are needed to confirm him, but one big question looms:

Will the Senate Democrats filibuster the nomination? That would require 60 votes to overcome.

Expect the task to drag on for months: Elena Kagan was confirmed 87 days after she was nominated, in 2010; Sonia Sotomayor’ confirmation in 2009 took 66 days, and Samuel Alito Jr. was confirmed 82 days after his nod, in 2006.

Events would have to unfold very smoothly for the nominee to be confirmed by April 26, the date of the last scheduled arguments in the current court term, which typically ends in late June. The next term begins in October.

The rest of Mr. Victor’ article explains the finer details of what is expected to happen over the next few months.

Now that you have read all this background, how will you report back to the rest of the class on the two questions we posed above: How does the nomination process work? Why might it be especially contentious this year?

_________

Group Two: What are the issues at stake with the nomination of Judge Gorsuch? Why should citizens care?

Do you care about topics like freedom of speech, religious liberty, gun rights, abortion and gay marriage? These are examples of important issues for which the Supreme Court has made legally binding rulings over the past decade.

When the rule of law, as written in the Constitution or by Congress, requires further clarity, the Supreme Court is often the final decider of how the law should be interpreted.

Just to give one example, in the 2015 decision, Obergefell v. Hodges, the court held in a 5– decision that the fundamental right to marry is guaranteed to same-sex couples by the Fourteenth Amendment. When the nation added the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1868, the new law seemingly did not have anything to do with gay rights. But almost 150 years later, a majority in the Supreme Court decided the amendment’ equal protection clause and due process clause ensured that the government must recognize marriages of both opposite-sex and same-sex couples. Conservatives and originalists would likely say the court is overreaching and the justices are being “ctivists,”hile liberals would likely argue that the justices are embracing a vision of a living Constitution, one that evolves with societal changes.

What else is at stake? In “What the Trump Presidency Means for the Supreme Court,”Adam Liptak writes:

For now, abortion rights appear secure. In June, the court struck down a restrictive Texas abortion law by a 5-to-3 vote, with Justice Kennedy joining the court’ four-member liberal wing. A new justice opposed to abortion rights would tighten that tally but not tip it.

Similarly, affirmative action seems safe in the short term. In June, the court upheld a race-conscious admissions program at the <pos>University of Texas</pos> by a 4-to-3 vote. Justice Elena Kagan was recused but would almost certainly have voted with the majority, making the effective vote 5 to 3. Here again, a single Trump appointment would not change things.

But a second Trump appointment is another matter, said Lee Epstein, a law professor and political scientist at <pos>Washington University</pos> in St. Louis. “e could see dramatic legal change,”he said, “ith the recent affirmative action and abortion cases on the chopping block.”

Other areas of the law could be subject to faster change after a single Trump appointment. A threat to public-sector unions that ended in a deadlock in March, for instance, could soon reach the court again. This time, the challengers are likely to gain a fifth vote.

The Supreme Court decides about 70 cases a year, reviewing only a tiny fraction of the hundreds of thousands of lawsuits and prosecutions filed in federal courts. The lower federal courts are for now dominated by Democratic appointees, and the vast majority of their decisions escape Supreme Court review. In the short term, that leaves plenty of room for significant and lasting liberal victories in the lower federal courts.

But the compositions of those courts will start to change, too, as Mr. Trump appoints judges to them. If his list of potential Supreme Court nominees is any guide, his lower-court appointments will also pull the law to the right.

In the meantime, the replacement of Justice Scalia with another conservative would return the Supreme Court to a familiar dynamic, said Ms. Wydra of the Constitutional Accountability Center.

“hat means conservative legal activists will once again be able to attempt aggressive changes that push the law even further to the right,”he said, “ut there will still be the potential for more progressive rulings like the marriage equality and abortion rulings we saw from the court even with Scalia.”

Now that you have read all this background, how will you report back to the rest of the class on the question we posed above: What are the issues at stake with the nomination of Judge Gorsuch? Why should citizens care?

Group Three: Who is Judge Gorsuch? What kind of Supreme Court justice is he likely to be?

The Times writes that President Trump nominated Judge Neil M. Gorsuch, a federal appeals court judge in Denver, to fill the Supreme Court seat left open by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, elevating a jurist whose conservative bent and originalist philosophy fit the mold of the man he would succeed.

But what does “onservative bent”nd “riginalist philosophy”ven mean? In this 2011 Op-Ed, Jeffrey Rosen, a law professor at <pos>George Washington University</pos> and the legal affairs editor of The New Republic, described originalism. Before his death, Justice Scalia was the court’ leading originalist. He believed that “he Constitution should be interpreted in light of the original understanding of its 18th- and 19th-century framers and ratifiers.”ccording to Mr. Rosen, for example, “ustice Scalia said a return to the founders’ision means states could impose the death penalty on anyone —ncluding juveniles or the mentally retarded, for example —nd there would be no abortion rights or rights of assisted suicide for the terminally ill.”

But Mr. Rosen writes that “onsensus among originalists is rare on any issue, and conservative justices often disagree among themselves about what the founders intended.”e continues, “ometimes, originalists agree about the founders’ntentions but disagree about overturning deeply rooted precedents that may clash with those intentions.”

According to this analysis, Judge Gorsuch will be a reliable conservative, “oting to limit gay rights, uphold restrictions on abortion and invalidate affirmative action programs.”hat else do we know about Judge Gorsuch?

With “In Judge Neil Gorsuch, an Echo of Scalia in Philosophy and Style,”Adam Liptak introduces us to President Trump’ nominee for the Supreme Court. The article begins:

President Trump campaigned as a Washington outsider. But his first Supreme Court nominee, Judge Neil M. Gorsuch, has deep roots in the city and the establishment Mr. Trump often criticized.

Judge Gorsuch’ mother was a high-level official in the Reagan administration. He spent part of his childhood in Washington and practiced law here for a decade, at a prominent law firm and in the Justice Department.

And, like all of the current justices, Judge Gorsuch is a product of the Ivy League, having attended college at <pos>Columbia</pos> and law school at <pos>Harvard</pos>.

But there is no doubt about his conservative credentials. And if there is a justice whom he most resembles, it is the one whose seat he has been nominated to fill, Justice Antonin Scalia.

Judge Gorsuch, 49 —ho was appointed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, in Denver, by President George W. Bush —s an originalist, meaning he tries to interpret the Constitution consistently with the understanding of those who drafted and adopted it. This approach leads him to generally but not uniformly conservative results.

“urs is the job of interpreting the Constitution,”e wrote in a concurrence last year. “nd that document isn’ some inkblot on which litigants may project their hopes and dreams.”

While he has not written extensively on several issues of importance to many conservatives, including gun control and gay rights, Judge Gorsuch has taken strong stands in favor of religious freedom, earning him admiration from the right.

Now that you have read all this background, how will you report back to the rest of the class on the question we posed above: Who is Judge Gorsuch? What kind of Supreme Court justice is he likely to be?

_________

Concluding Activity

As a class, have the three groups share the information they learned. Finally, you can have the class take on the following questions, through class discussion, writing, a fishbowl or one of the kinds of debate techniques suggested in this lesson plan.

1. What is your reaction to Mr. Trump’ pick for Supreme Court justice? Do you think he made a good choice? Why?

2. How do you think the Senate should vote on Judge Gorsuch’ nomination?

3. How should Democratic senators respond after Republicans refused to even consider President Obama’ choice for 10 months starting in March 2016? Should they play hard-nosed politics to punish Republicans for the way they treated President Obama’ nominee? Should they vote on Judge Gorsuch solely based on his credentials? Should they treat this nomination as a referendum on the president? Should they restrain their opposition for now, knowing there may well be another nomination fight during the next four years if there’ another vacancy on the Court? What would you do if you were in the Democratic opposition right now?

_________

More from The Learning Network

 Ways to Study the U.S. Supreme Court With The New York Times 

The balance of power at the Supreme Court could truly shift if there is a second vacancy while Donald J. Trump is president. | Damon Winter/The New York Times | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Judge Neil M. Gorsuch, if confirmed, will take the seat vacated by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia. 

