
Neil Gorsuch, Senate, Standing Rock: Your Wednesday Briefing

By SEAN ALFANO 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

Trump announces his Supreme Court pick.

Let the scrutiny begin.

President Trump’ nominee, Judge Neil M. Gorsuch, a 49-year-old federal appeals court judge in Denver, is viewed as a conservative in the mold of Justice Antonin Scalia, whom he would replace.

Who is Judge Gorsuch?

He has deep ties to Washington, where his mother was a high-level official in the Reagan administration. After attending <pos>Columbia</pos> and <pos>Harvard Law School</pos>, he served as a clerk for Justice Anthony M. Kennedy. Later, Judge Gorsuch worked in private practice and in the Justice Department.

What is his judicial philosophy? Judge Gorsuch is an originalist, meaning he tries to interpret the Constitution consistent with the understanding of those who drafted it, our writer explains.

Where would he fit on the court? He would be more conservative than Justice Scalia was, but less conservative than Justice Clarence Thomas, according to a study of potential nominees. The authors predicted that Judge Gorsuch would likely vote to limit gay rights, uphold restrictions on abortion and overturn affirmative action programs.

Now what? The confirmation process could take months. A looming question is whether Senate Democrats will try to filibuster the nomination, since Republicans refused to consider former President Barack Obama’ choice of Judge Merrick B. Garland last year.

showdown in the Senate.

Democrats delayed the confirmations of Mr. Trump’ picks to lead the Treasury and the Health and Human Services Department, refusing to attend scheduled votes on Tuesday. There is also an effort to block the president’ choice for attorney general, Senator Jeff Sessions.

Here’  how individual senators have voted for nominees so far.

•issent over immigration order spreads.

A letter circulating through American embassies, asserting that Mr. Trump’ directive to temporarily bar citizens of seven predominantly Muslim countries would not make the U.S. safer, has around 1,000 signatures, State Department officials said on Tuesday.

•ftermath of terrorist attack in Canada.

The deadly shootings at a mosque in Quebec City have raised questions over whether law enforcement officials play down the threat of far-right nationalist groups.

There is no evidence that the suspect, a university student, has ties to such groups, however.

•edical mystery in India is solved.

Researchers had suspected that heat stroke, infections or pesticides caused outbreaks of a disease that struck only children.

But an investigation found that compounds in lychees  can be fatal for malnourished children.

•ntroducing The Daily, your new audio news report.

Our reporter Michael Barbaro runs down the big stories and the big ideas. Fifteen minutes a day, five days a week. Listen here, or at your favorite podcast spot.

Business

•ore than 400 people recently laid off by Wells Fargo face another setback.

As the bank deals with a scandal over sham accounts, it has been prohibited from making severance payments.

• Chinese-born billionaire, Xiao Jianhua, is thought to have been seized by Chinese police officers in his Hong Kong apartment last week.

If confirmed, the arrest by mainland officials would contravene the “ne country, two systems”ule that allows the former British colony to run its own affairs.

•here’ a battle in the U.S. government over whether people should bear more responsibility for monitoring their finances.

Johnny Depp’ lawsuit against his financial advisers offers insight into the political debate, our columnist observes.

•.S. stocks were mixed on Tuesday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Noteworthy

•p-Doc: “en Meter Tower.”

Two filmmakers asked 67 people who had never been on a high-dive platform before to participate in an experiment: Would they jump or chicken out?

“vercoming our most cautious impulses with bravery unites all humankind,”he pair behind the documentary said.

•he movement behind Standing Rock.

Native American activists have been fighting one of their biggest environmental battles in years over the Dakota Access Pipeline. The Times Magazine looks at how the operation began.

It grew from “n anti-suicide campaign among a tight-knit group of youths, most younger than 25, impelled by tragedy and guided by prophecy,”ur writer says.

• reminder that nature is amazing.

At the mouth of the Tokachi River on Hokkaido, the northern Japanese island, lumps of ice shine like diamonds.

And depending on the time of day, the ice can appear blue, orange, sapphire, topaz or opal.

•ats at the dog show. Wait, what?

Changes are coming to the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show. New breeds have been added to the annual event and —race yourself —o have felines.

The event begins Feb. 11 in New York.

Smarter Living

•ho knew that hair-washing could be so ... complicated?

•fter a painful breakup, a young woman found healing in honesty —with her former boyfriend and with herself.

•ecipe of the day: If you’e got an hour tonight, try this simple take on roast chicken.

Back Story

Avalanches have made news in recent weeks. One in central Italy buried a hotel and killed 29 people. Another, in California, seriously injured a group of hikers.

Technology can help snow adventurers survive avalanches with tools to add to the basic shovel and probe.

The biggest danger is being buried and running out of air. So there are backpacks with airbags that cause the churning snow to drive the wearer toward the surface.

For someone trapped beneath the snow, a product called an AvaLung can be a lifesaver. It’ a breathing tube that snakes through a backpack, so that inhalations are far from the ice block formed by the melting power of exhalations.

But one of the most recommended tools, the avalanche transceiver, isn’ all that new.

In the ’0s, the scientist Edward R. LaChapelle developed an early version, which John Lawton, another researcher, improved.

That led to the Skadi, an audio transmitter inside a plastic box nicknamed “he hot dog,”hich fit inside a jacket pocket.

The Times heralded its arrival in 1969, noting that the Skadi could eventually replace a very different helper: the avalanche dog.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Judge Neil Gorsuch at the White House on Tuesday. He is viewed as a conservative in the mold of Justice Antonin Scalia, whom he would replace on the Supreme Court. | Al Drago/The New York Times | A memorial outside the Islamic Cultural Center in Quebec City. The attack has raised tensions in Canada over its embrace of Muslim immigration. | Ian Willms for The New York Times | A mysterious disease in India, which led to acute brain swelling in children, has been traced to lychees. | Jaipal Singh/European Pressphoto Agency | The Bengal Cat will be featured in a non-competitive “eet the breeds”xhibition at the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show this month. | Bebeto Matthews/Associated Press | Avalanche dogs are trained to track down and sniff out people buried under the snow. | Michael Dalder/Reuters | Would you jump? Or would you chicken out? | By MAXIMILIEN VAN AERTRYCK and AXEL DANIELSON 

Document NYTFEED020170201ed2100439
