
Who Needs Celebrities?

By SOPAN DEB 

At a rally in Denver just days before the election, Donald J. Trump went off on a long tangent attacking Jay Z and Beyoncéor using ''filthy'' language during performances in support of Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee.

''It's demeaning to the political process,'' Mr. Trump said.

Mr. Trump himself had used profane language before in the company of celebrities, like his infamous comments to Billy Bush. But with so many stars turning their backs on him, he developed a daily riff against them -- and the broader culture of celebrity in America. The next day, in Michigan, he galvanized his supporters by playing on their disdain for elites in the entertainment world.

''And you know the beauty of this crowd?'' Mr. Trump said. ''It's without a guitar.''

Mr. Trump's denunciation of pop culture, which has only intensified since his victory, is rich with irony, given that he sought and yearned for acceptance from Hollywood and cultural elites for decades. Just last week, he blasted Madonna and other celebrities on Fox News, claiming they hurt the cause of the women's march in Washington. Yet for most of his life, A-listers were his base -- far more than the average Americans whom he began aggressively cultivating when he ran for president.

''His biggest construction project has been the construction of his own celebrity,'' said Michael D'Antonio, the Pulitzer Prize-winning author of ''The Truth About Trump.''

Now, as Mr. Trump adjusts to a new kind of spotlight, he appears increasingly determined to discredit and demonize the very celebrity culture that he was once so desperate to be a part of through friendships, fortune and television fame.

For years his relationship with Hollywood seemed based on mutual adoration. Guests at Mr. Trump's wedding to Melania Trump in 2005 were a who's who from numerous realms: music (Billy Joel), fashion (Anna Wintour), sports (Derek Jeter) and many others.

''The only thing that was surprising to me was how all these celebrities would queue up to fawn around Donald Trump, particularly the likes of Madonna, who used to be at all his parties,'' said Piers Morgan, the television host. Mr. Morgan became well acquainted with Mr. Trump as a contestant on the first iteration of ''Celebrity Apprentice.''

''Of course, the moment he stood as the Republican candidate, almost from that day, they turned on him like rattlesnakes and they turned on him as a collective mass,'' Mr. Morgan added.

But some of Mr. Trump's wedding guests weren't exactly close friends. Mr. Joel, for example, told a radio station last year that he didn't know why he was invited.

''I don't remember much because I think I drank too much,'' Mr. Joel said. ''But I don't really know him that well. You know, I think I met him once or twice.''

Mr. Trump's interest in Hollywood began even before he went to Wharton, the <pos>University of Pennsylvania</pos>'s business school, when he briefly considered attending the <pos>University of Southern California</pos>'s film school.

''I always liked it,'' Mr. Trump told Harvey Levin, the founder of TMZ, in an interview on Fox News. ''I liked the glamour of movies.''

Mr. Trump parlayed his fame as a wealthy real estate mogul into a number of movie and television cameos, while simultaneously expanding his business empire. And then came ''The Apprentice,'' a perfect storm of the blustery businessman's bravado and corporate expertise.

He was sewn into the pop-culture fabric of America with his prime-time network reality television show, something he intensely desired. He even took the show to Los Angeles for a season and eventually created a spinoff, which brought into sharp focus his love of celebrity.

''Donald Trump liked the celebrity world,'' Mr. Morgan said. ''He liked big stars. He liked being around them, whether they were big sports stars or big entertainers.''

As a showman, Mr. Trump was versatile. In 2004, he appeared on MTV at a mock political convention promoting Eminem to ''endorse'' the rapper for president. At the 2005 Annual Primetime Emmy Awards, Mr. Trump appeared in overalls to sing a spoof of the theme song to ''Green Acres,'' along with Megan Mullally, best known for her work on the sitcom ''Will & Grace.''

Eventually, he was permanently enshrined in Hollywood when he received the 2,327th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2007.

''It was something that was given to me by some very powerful people in Hollywood and I'm very honored by it,'' Mr. Trump told a reporter afterward.

Mr. Trump's interest in culture stretched beyond television and film. He once was a co-producer on a Broadway play, the beginning of a long fascination with theater, right after graduating from Wharton. It was called ''Paris Is Out!'' and was poorly received.

He often frequented flashy Broadway openings, including ''The Phantom of the Opera'' in the late 1980s and ''The Will Rogers Follies'' a few years later, where he applauded Marla Maples, then his fiancé. The publicity from Ms. Maples hitting the stage led the producer of ''Paris Is Out!'' to tell New York magazine that he was talking with Mr. Trump about the possibility of a musical based on his life. It never came to fruition, but it wouldn't be the last time that a musical inspired by Mr. Trump was discussed.

Then there was the occasional museum visit to curry favor.

In the mid-1990s, Mr. Trump met Herbert Muschamp, an architecture critic for The New York Times, at the Museum of Modern Art to discuss a negative review that Mr. Muschamp had given the Trump International Hotel and Tower in Columbus Circle. Mr. Muschamp wanted to show Mr. Trump an Andy Warhol painting from 1962 -- ''Gold Marilyn Monroe.''

''There's a large sculpture in the middle of the room, a brass floor piece by Donald Judd,'' Mr. Muschamp wrote. ''Evidently Mr. Trump mistakes it for a coffee table, for he uses it as one, tossing his overcoat and some binders full of pictures on top of it as we walk over to the painting.''

For his part, Mr. Trump openly praised Mr. Muschamp's article about the museum visit.

''They say it was the longest article ever written in The New York Times,'' Mr. Trump told Mr. D'Antonio, the biographer.

But now, Mr. Trump and celebrity culture are in open warfare. He has targeted Broadway, late-night shows, the film industry, top-selling musicians and the many celebrities who would not attend his inauguration.

Since his election, artists of all stripes have expressed displeasure with Mr. Trump. Some called for a shutdown of museums to protest his election. Actors lined up to bash him at awards shows, including at the Screen Actors Guild Awards on Sunday. One of the few recognizable names to attend Mr. Trump's pre-inauguration concert was Jon Voight. Mr. Trump's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame was vandalized with a sledgehammer and a pickax in October.

Never one to take criticism lightly, Mr. Trump responded by trying to disparage celebrities in the same way he demonizes the news media, often using his favorite tool: Twitter. After the women's march in Washington, which drew a long list of celebrities, Mr. Trump posted on Twitter: ''Watched protests yesterday but was under the impression that we just had an election! Why didn't these people vote? Celebs hurt cause badly.''

Last week, Sean Hannity, a Fox News host, prodded Mr. Trump to respond to Madonna's comments at the march, in which she said that she had thought about ''blowing up the White House.''

''I think she hurt that whole cause,'' Mr. Trump said. ''Her, and a couple of others.''

He has since sent shots across the bow at late-night comedy shows, lashing out at ''Saturday Night Live'' multiple times and calling that show ''unwatchable.''

The ultimate insult from top artists was when many would not perform at his inauguration, leaving Mr. Trump's transition team scrambling to find musicians.

Mr. Trump outwardly brushed off the slight on Twitter.

''The so-called 'A' list celebrities are all wanting tixs to the inauguration, but look what they did for Hillary, NOTHING. I want the PEOPLE!''

In the end, the lack of cultural firepower in Mr. Trump's favor didn't matter: He won. And this might have brought him the satisfaction he has craved, incidentally, without Hollywood's embrace.

''I think he's had the last laugh because indisputably Donald Trump is not just the most powerful man in America now, he's the most famous celebrity in America,'' Mr. Morgan said. ''He probably has a wry smile to himself in the presidential bedroom of the White House.''

Donald J. Trump and the singer Billy Joel at a party at Trump Tower after the finale of ''The Apprentice'' in 2004. Between them is Melania Knauss, then Mr. Trump's girlfriend. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVE ALLOCCA/STARPIX, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS) (C1); Above, Donald J. Trump with Marla Maples, then his fiancé, as she greets the news media at the Palace Theater after her Broadway debut in ''The Will Rogers Follies.'' At left, Mr. Trump and Megan Mullally perform at the 2005 Emmy Awards at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBIN PLATZER/TWIN IMAGES & THE LIFE IMAGES COLLECTION, VIA GETTY IMAGES; ROBERT GALBRAITH/REUTERS) (C5) 

Document NYTF000020170201ed210006j
