Donald Trump, the Religious Right’s Trojan Horse

This time a year ago, leaders of the old guard religious right were determined to stop Donald J. Trump from winning the Iowa caucuses. James Dobson, the founder and former president of Focus on the Family, and Tony Perkins, the president of the Family Research Council, joined Senator Ted Cruz as he campaigned in the state. Prominent female anti-abortion activists released an open letter, “Pro-Life Women Sound the Alarm: Donald Trump Is Unacceptable.” It cited, among other things, Mr. Trump’s former ownership of a casino strip club.

Driving around Iowa that January, I heard Christian radio hosts rebuke Jerry Falwell Jr., the president of <pos>Liberty University</pos>, for giving his support to Mr. Trump.

“Mr. Falwell, in light of Mr. Trump’s attacks on those he happens to dislike at the moment,” asked one, Michael L. Brown, in a plaintive open letter, “How can you point to his Christlike character?”

What a difference a year makes.

Once Mr. Trump seized the Republican nomination, religious conservatives realized that their only path to federal influence lay in a bargain with this profane, thrice-married Manhattan sybarite. So they got in line, ultimately proving to be Mr. Trump’s most loyal backers.

When, last October, a recording emerged of Mr. Trump’s boasting to a TV host about grabbing women “by the pussy,” many secular conservatives urged him to step aside, but most of the religious right stayed true. Ralph Reed, the founder and chairman of the Faith and Freedom Coalition and head of Mr. Trump’s religious advisory board, argued that for people of faith, “a 10-year-old tape of a private conversation with a TV talk show host ranks pretty low on their hierarchy of their concerns.”

In November, exit polls showed that Mr. Trump won 81 percent of white evangelicals, more than the born-again George W. Bush garnered in either of his races. Mr. Brown, the radio host, remained worried about Mr. Trump’s temperament, but saw the hand of God in his victory.

“I believe Trump has been elected president by divine intervention,” he wrote on Nov. 9.

Mr. Trump is known for failing to honor his debts, but in this case, he’s fully repaying his Christian conservative supporters. For all his flagrant sinfulness, he’s assembling a near-theocratic administration, his cabinet full of avowed enemies of church-state separation. His vice president, Mike Pence, agreed to address the March for Life in Washington, D.C., on Friday, becoming the highest administration official ever to appear at the annual anti-abortion event. And one of Mr. Trump’s first acts as president was to widely expand the so-called global gag rule on abortion.

Past Republican administrations have imposed the rule on foreign organizations receiving American family planning funding, preventing them from discussing abortion with their clients or advocating abortion law liberalization. But George W. Bush specifically exempted from the rule his H.I.V./AIDS program, which would otherwise have been unlikely to meet its prevention and treatment targets. Mr. Trump, however, went right ahead with an executive order applying the rule to all recipients of American global health aid.

There is a deep irony here. It was the religious right’s weakness, which meant it couldn’t play kingmaker in the primary, that made Mr. Trump’s nomination possible, but his victory has given the movement tremendous new power.

The Christian right has been declared dead many times. Before this election, though, it truly seemed to be staggering toward the grave. According to the Pew Research Center, as of last April, barely a third of Republican voters who attended religious services weekly supported Mr. Trump. He had consistent evangelical support, but it tended to come from less strongly affiliated Christians — people who might identify as born again, but who weren’t connected to the congregations that once formed the building blocks of the religious right, and who didn’t take marching orders from the movement’s leaders.

By winning the primary over the strenuous objections of prominent Christian conservatives, Mr. Trump revealed their diminishing sway. When those same leaders decided to champion him, they had to shrug off everything they’d ever said about the primacy of personal morality in politics. Had he lost, they’d have been utterly discredited.

But Mr. Trump didn’t lose, and now the movement that helped deliver his victory faces a deliverance of its own. President Trump may lack a coherent ideology, but he shares with the religious right a kind of Christian identity politics, a sense that the symbols of Christianity, if not its virtues, deserve cultural precedence. As he said in a speech to the Faith and Freedom Coalition’s Road to Majority conference in June: “We will respect and defend Christian Americans. Christian Americans.”