<pos>University of Wisconsin</pos> Student Arrested in Multiplying Sexual Assault Cases

A <pos>University of Wisconsin</pos> student was arrested this month on charges that he sexually assaulted a female student, prompting dozens of women to contact the police about encounters they said they had had with the man, according to the police and several news reports.

The student, Alec Cook, 20, was arrested last week and accused of attacking a 20-year-old woman at his apartment in downtown Madison on Oct. 12, according to a police report. News of the arrest prompted another woman to come forth. And then another.

“I saw the news story and was empowered by another girl being able to tell what happened to her, that I thought I could now finally tell,” the second woman told a police detective, according to the report. A third woman reported that Mr. Cook had assaulted her last year.

Mr. Cook, who is being held without bond, is expected to be formally charged on Thursday in four sexual assaults, according to The Wisconsin State Journal.

A search of Mr. Cook’s apartment uncovered a black leather book in which he described how he had met a series of women and what he liked about them, a Madison police investigator, Grant Humerickhouse, said in a search warrant, according to news reports.

“The entries went on to document what he wanted to do with the females,” Mr. Humerickhouse said. “Disturbingly enough, there were statements of ‘kill’ and statements of ‘sexual’ desires.”

The police said in the warrant that they had heard from dozens of other women about encounters with Mr. Cook, who attended high school in Edina, Minn., according to The Star Tribune.

In a statement, lawyers for Mr. Cook suggested that he was the victim of “a modern-day character assassination” driven by a mob mentality.

“The internet has replaced the streets,” the lawyers, Christopher T. Van Wagner and Jessa Nicholson, said. “As a result, for the past few days, we have seen how the rapid-fire internet news cycle erodes that presumption of innocence. This is exactly what is happening to Alec Cook right now.”

Mr. Cook, a junior majoring in business, has been suspended and banned from campus, university officials said in a statement.

“We were shocked and saddened to learn that several <pos>U.W.-Madison</pos> students have reported being sexually assaulted by a fellow student,” the statement read. “Sexual violence is unacceptable in our campus and community.”