How an Aesthete’s Eye Can Help a Doctor’s Hand

For eight years, Bonnie Pitman has been battling a rare, incurable lung infection. Frequent hospitalizations took such a toll on her that she had to step down from her dream job as director of the Dallas Museum of Art, and she uses a breathing apparatus to open her airways several times a day.

Some might find her condition utterly discouraging. But in days filled with medical care, Ms. Pitman has found uplift from art, leading her to redirect her more than 40 years of experience as a museum educator and leader toward extending the influence of art on the practice of medicine.

“The hardest part of being chronically ill is that you’re not in control of your body,” Ms. Pitman said. “But you can control your spirit.”

Ms. Pitman is widely viewed as a galvanizing force in the fledgling — and still debated — field of medical humanities programs, which promote the close observation of artworks as a way of improving the clinical diagnostic skills of medical students. Collaborations between doctors and art educators have multiplied in recent years, despite lingering skepticism from people in both professions.

For the last two years, Ms. Pitman has taught an observation course in partnership with a doctor at the <pos>University of Texas Southwestern Medical School</pos> and with educators at the Dallas Museum of Art, where she resigned as director in 2011. And after researching the range of such collaborations nationwide, Ms. Pitman brought together 130 educators and doctors involved in 60 programs to share their teaching strategies and evaluation methods at a conference she organized in June at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.

She has just published a report on the forum on the website of the Edith O’Donnell Institute of Art History at the <pos>University of Texas at Dallas</pos>, along with recommendations for the future, descriptions of the 60 programs, sample syllabuses and an extensive bibliography. (Ms. Pitman is a distinguished scholar in residence at the institute, which financed the MoMA conference.) It is the first broad database on these medical humanities programs.

“It’s a launching pad,” Ms. Pitman said. “I see this as one of the most important changes in the way art museums can interact with their publics and that medical schools can utilize community resources.”

Addressing the gathering at MoMA on the first morning, Ms. Pitman spoke of how more sophisticated imaging techniques, lab tests and computers have diminished direct observational interaction between doctors and patients. “In my very extensive time in the hospital, residents using iPads would interview me and leave and never even look at me in the eye,” she said.

Dr. Bhavika Kaul, who took an observation course as a student and now jointly teaches it at the <pos>Baylor College of Medicine in Houston</pos>, credited art observation with helping her catch a patient’s misdiagnosis during her residency. “When I walked in the room, the first thing I noticed was the patient, who had been in the hospital without sun exposure, was 10 shades darker than her family members,” she said. “I immediately diagnosed her with adrenal insufficiency.”

“The course had taught me to see beyond just the vital signs and the labs,” she recalled.

The first such course was created in 1999 at <pos>Yale</pos>, where medical students began undergoing training in close observation at the <pos>Yale Center for British Art</pos>, followed by an analysis of medical images. “Both activities illustrate a variety of cognitive and visual features that serve as paradigms for evaluating patients,” said Dr. Irwin Braverman of the Yale School of Medicine, who, with his Yale museum partner Linda Friedlaender, published the positive results of a controlled study in The Journal of the American Medical Association in 2001.

