<pos>Harvard</pos> Reaches Tentative Agreement to End Cafeteria Workers’ Strike

Cafeteria workers at Harvard, who have been on strike for nearly three weeks in an effort to avoid an increase in their health care costs and to earn higher salaries, could return to work this week after a tentative agreement was reached with the university, a union president said.

Brian Lang, the president of Unite Here Local 26, which represents about 750 cafeteria workers, confirmed that terms had been reached early Tuesday morning that satisfied the workers’ demands.

Mediators helped work out the agreement between a union subcommittee and the university. On Tuesday, it would be reviewed and voted on by the full bargaining committee. It would then be brought before the entire union membership on Wednesday, and those on strike could return to work as soon as Thursday.

Mr. Lang said he was confident the committee would ratify the deal. “We have accomplished all of the goals that we set out in this agreement,” he said.

The union had said it was striking over health care costs and pushing for a raise in workers’ wages, from an average of $30,000 annually to at least $35,000. Mr. Lang said those aims had been met.

Tania deLuzuriaga, a spokeswoman for the university, confirmed that there was a tentative agreement with the union. She later forwarded a statement from <pos>Harvard</pos>’s executive vice president, Katie Lapp, which confirmed that Tuesday’s deal had addressed the issues of health care and wages.

Mr. Lang said that if the union voted to accept the deal, the strike would end and the employees would return to work Thursday. He said that 95 percent of the union’s members had participated through the duration of the strike and that they had been joined by a coalition of students, faculty and alumni.

“This started out as a group of the lowest-paid workers on the richest university deciding to take a stand for themselves and their families,” he said. “In this battle, the side that was fighting for a more humane approach won out.”

In a testament to the workers’ determination, some who were not aware that a deal had been struck braved a chilly October morning to keep the strike going. Karyn Regal, a reporter for WBZ News Radio in Boston, reported that some had returned to protest with their picket signs at about 7:45 a.m. Tuesday.