<pos>SUNY</pos>’s Wise Move on Admissions

Colleges that ask about criminal convictions on their applications frighten away untold numbers of students who could succeed academically and who present no risk to campus safety. Fortunately, the trustees of the 64-campus <pos>State University of New York</pos> did the right thing last week when they voted to remove the felony question from admissions applications. Colleges elsewhere in the country would do well to follow this example.

Campus crimes are mainly committed by outsiders or by students who do not have criminal records. In recent decades, however, colleges have reacted to a few highly publicized campus crimes by making it more difficult for people with criminal convictions to gain admission. This kind of screening became easier in 2006 when the Common Application — used today by more than 600 schools — added questions about criminal convictions and even high school disciplinary records.

This made it easy for colleges to exclude applicants, nor just for minor offenses but also for school disciplinary infractions that might once have been written off as adolescent indiscretions. This has been particularly damaging to minority students, who are disproportionately and unjustifiably subject to suspensions, expulsions and other penalties.

The Obama administration warned colleges earlier this year that they risked violating state and federal laws if they automatically screened out applications based on criminal histories instead of taking into account the specific record of each applicant. It also pointed out that some of the largest university systems — including those in Arizona, California and Texas — did not consider an applicant’s criminal history.

The <pos>State University of New York</pos> came under scrutiny last year when a study by the Center for Community Alternatives — a nonprofit that focuses on alternatives to imprisonment — showed that nearly two-thirds of people who answered “yes” to the felony question stopped short of completing the application process. <pos>SUNY</pos>’s chancellor, Nancy Zimpher, cited that study when she recommended that the trustees remove the felony question from applications.