For College Athletes, Financial Coaching From Retired Pros

They are two former professional athletes whose prospects started out quite differently.

Bart Scott went undrafted coming out of <pos>Southern Illinois University</pos> but ended up playing 11 seasons in the National Football League, and made it to the Pro Bowl in 2006.

Antoine Walker, who led the <pos>University of Kentucky</pos> to a National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball championship in 1996, was a first-round draft pick and won a National Basketball Association championship in 2006 with the Miami Heat.

When it came to money, the two men ended up differently as well. Mr. Scott’s last contract with the New York Jets was worth $48 million. He managed his money well and is now a commentator for CBS Sports. Mr. Walker made $108 million during his career, then lost the majority of it. He filed for bankruptcy protection in 2010, just two years after retiring from the N.B.A.

The two are now working as consultants to a financial education program for college athletes that was developed by Morgan Stanley’s global sports and entertainment group.

Mr. Walker says he sees his work in the program as a way to make something good out of losing all his money. “I try to be open and transparent,” he said in an interview. “I tell them how I lost my money. I tell them the things that I did and did not do. It’s the only way to be.”

The lessons, though aimed at college athletes, are universal for all college students. While the program gives financial advice to the few who may turn professional and reap millions of dollars, its focus is more on the many athletes who will have to adapt to life outside a big-time college sports program where everything isn’t paid for.

Chevy Graham, a senior who plays cornerback for the <pos>University of Kansas</pos> football team and attended one of the sessions, said Mr. Walker’s story stuck with him. “It was given to his family, the people around him, bad business ventures, cars,” Mr. Graham said. “It was shocking to see that amount of funds being wasted and distributed in that manner.”

